***************************************************

Author:                                  Alan Dean Foster

Title:                                       Nor Crystal Tears

Series:                                    A Novel of the Humanx
Commonwealth                                    

Series No:                             

Original copyright year:                 1982

Genre:                                     Science Fiction

Date of e-text:                         12/29/2000            

Prepared by:

Last Revised:                           /  /                       

Revised by:

Version:                                 1.0

Comments:                            Download both lit and txt version.

                           Please correct any errors you find in this
e-text,

                           update the txt file’s version number and
redistribute.

***************************************************

A Del Rey Book

Published by Ballantine Books

 

Copyright © 1982 by Alan Dean Foster

 

All rights reserved under International and Pan?American Copyright
Conventions. Published in the United States by Ballantine Books, a
division of Random House, Inc., New York, and simultaneously in Canada
by Random House of Canada, Limited, Toronto, Canada.

 

Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 82?8836

 

ISBN 0?345?32447?1

 

Manufactured in the United States of America

 

First Edition: September 1982

Sixth Printing: January 1985

 

Cover art by Michael Whelan

***************************************************

For the tiger with the little?girl voice and the velvet claws,

My agent, Virginia Kidd, with thanks for

Ten years of encouraging purrs and constructive scratches.

***************************************************


  Chapter One

 

It's hard to be a larva. At first there's nothing. Very gradually a dim,
uncertain consciousness coalesces from nothingness. Awareness of the
world arrives not as a shock, but as a gray inevitability. The larva
cannot move, cannot speak. But it can think.

His first memories, naturally, were of the Nursery: a cool, dimly lit
tubular chamber of controlled commotion and considerable noise. Beneath
the gently arched ceiling, adults conversed with his fellow larvae. With
awareness of his surroundings came recognition of self and of body: a
lumpish, meter?and?a?half?long cylindrical mass of mottled white flesh.

Through simple, incomplete larval eyes he hungrily ab­sorbed the limited
world. Adults, equipment, walls and ceiling and floor, his companions,
the cradle he lay in, all were white and black and in?between shades of
gray. They were all he could perceive. Color was a mysterious,
unimag­inable realm to which only adults had access. Of all the unknowns
of existence, he most pondered what was blue, what was yellow?the taste
of the withheld spectrum.

The adults who managed the Nursery and attended the young were
experienced in that service. They'd heard generations of youngsters ask
the same questions in the same order over and over, yet they were? ever
patient and polite. So they tried their best to explain color to him.
The words had no meaning because there were no possible reference
points, no mental landmarks to which a larva could relate. It was like
trying to describe the sun that warmed the sur­face high, high above the
subterranean Nursery. He came to think of the sun as a brightly blazing
something that produced an intense absence of dark.

As he grew the attendants let him move about in his crude humping,
wormlike fashion. Nurses bustled through the Nursery, busy adults gifted
with real mobility. Teach­ing machines murmured their endless litany to
the stu­dious. Other adults occasionally came to visit, including a pair
who identified themselves as his own parents.

He compared them with his companions, like himself squirming white
masses ending in dull black eyes and thin mouth?slits. How he envied the
adults their clean lines and mature bodies, the four strong legs, the
footarms above serving either as hands or as a third pair of legs, the
deli­cate truhands above them.

They had real eyes, adults did. Great multifaceted com­pound orbs that
shone like a cluster of bright jewels (light gray to him, though he knew
they were orange and red and gold, whatever those were). These were set
to the sides of the shining valentine?shaped heads, from which a pair of
feathery antennae sprouted, honestly white. He was fasci­nated by the
antennae, as all his companions were. The adults would explain that two
senses were held there, the sense of smell and the sense of faz.

He understood fazzing, the ability to detect the presence of moving
objects by sensing the disruption of air. But the concept of smell
utterly eluded him, much as color did. Along with arms and legs, then,
he desperately wished for antennae. He desperately wished to be complete.

The Nurses were patient, fully understanding such yearn­ings. Antennae
and limbs would come with time. Mean­while there was much to learn.

They taught speech, though larvae were capable of no more than a crude
wheezing and gasping through their flex­ible mouth?parts. It took hard
mandibles and adult lungs and throats to produce the elegant clicks and
whistles of mature communication.

So he could see after a fashion, and hear, and speak a little. But sight
was incomplete without color and he could not faz or smell at all. By
way of compensation the teachers explained that no adult could faz or
smell nearly as well as the primitive ancestors of the Thranx, back when
the race dwelt in unintelligence even deeper in the bowels of the earth
than they did now, when artificial light did not exist, and the senses
of faz and smell necessarily exceeded that of sight in importance.

He listened and understood, but that did not lessen the frustration. He
would worm his way around the exercise course because they insisted he
needed exercise, but he was ever conscious of what a pale shadow of true
mobility it was. Oh, so frustrating!

Larval years were the Learning Time. Hardly able to move, unable to
smell or faz, barely able to converse, but with decent sight and hearing
a larva was adequately equipped for learning.

He was a particularly voracious student, absorbing everything and asking
greedily for more. His teachers and Nurses were pleased, as was the
teaching machine attached to his cradle. He mastered High and Low
Thranx, although he could properly speak neither. He learned physics and
chemistry and basic biology, including the danger posed by any body of
water deeper than the thorax, where the adult's breathing spicules were
located. An adult Thranx could float, but not forever, and when the
water entered the body, it sank. Swimming was a talent reserved for
prim­itive creatures with internal skeletons.

He was taught astronomy and geology although he'd never seen the sky or
the earth, for all that he lived be­neath the surface. The Nursery was
exquisitely tiled and paneled. Other sections of Paszex, his home town,
were lined with plastics, ceramics, metals, or stonework. In the ancient
burrows on the planet Hivehom, where the Thranx had evolved, were
tunnels and chambers lined with regurgi­tated cellulose and body plaster.

Industry and agriculture were studied. History told how the social
arthropods known as the Thranx first mastered Hivehom, adapting to
existence above as well as below the surface, and then spread to other
worlds. Eventually theol­ogy was discussed and the larvae made their
choices.

Then on to more complex subjects as the mind matured, to biochemistry,
nucleonics, sociology and psychology and the arts, including
jurisprudence. He particularly enjoyed the history of space travel, the
stories of the first hesitant flights to the three moons of Hivehom in
clumsy rockets, the development of the posigravity drive that pushed
ships through the gulf between the stars, and the establishment of
colonies on worlds like Dixx and Everon and Calm Nursery. He learned of
the burgeoning commerce between Willo?wane, his own colony world, and
Hivehom and the other colonies.

How he wanted to go to Hivehom when he learned of it! The mother world
of the people, Hivehom. Magical, enchanting name. His Nurses smiled at
his excitement. It was only natural he should want to travel there.
Everyone did.

Yet something more showed on his profile charts, an un­defined yearning
that puzzled the larval psychologists. Possibly it was related to his
unusual hatching. The normal four eggs had bequeathed not male and
female pairs but three females and this one male.

He was aware of the psychologists' concerns but didn't worry about them.
He concentrated on learning as much as possible, stuffing his mind full
to bursting with the won­ders of existence. While these strange adults
mumbled about "indecisiveness" and "unwillingness to tend toward a
course of action," he plowed through the learning pro­grams, mitigating
their worries with his extraordinary ap­petite for knowledge.

Couldn't they understand that he wasn't interested in any one particular
subject? He was interested in /every­thing. /But the psychologists
didn't understand, and they fretted. So did his family, because a Thranx
on the Verge always knows what he or she intends to do ... after.
Gen­eralizations do not a life make.

For a while they thought he might want to be a philoso­pher, but his
general interests were of specifics and not of abstruse speculations.
Only his unusually high scores pre­vented their moving him from the
general Nursery to one reserved for the mentally deficient.

On and on he studied, learning that Willow?wane was a wonderful world of
comfortable swamps and lowlands, of heat and humidity much like that of
the Nursery. A true garden world whose poles were free of ice and whose
large continents were heavily jungled. Willow?wane was even more
accommodating than Hivehom itself. He was fortunate to have been born there.

His name he knew from early on. He was Ryo, of the Family Zen, of the
Clan Zu, of the Hive Zex. The last was a holdover from primitive times,
for only towns and cities existed now, no more true hives.

More history, the information that the development of real intelligence
was concurrent with the development of egg?laying ability in all Thranx
females. Gone was the need for a specialized Queen. Their newly evolved
biological flexibility gave the Thranx a natural advantage over other
arthropods. But Thranx still paid respects to an honorary clanmother and
hivemother, echoes of the biological ma­triarchy that once dominated the
race. That was tradition. The people had a great love of tradition.

He remembered his shock when he'd first learned of the AAnn, a
space?going race of intelligence, calculation, cunning, and
aggressiveness. The shock arose not from their abilities but from the
fact that the creatures possessed internal skeletons, leathery skins,
and flexible bodies. They moved like the primitive animals of the
jungles but their intelligence was undeniable. The discovery had caused
con­sternation in the Thranx scientific community, which had postulated
that no creature lacking a protective exoskeleton could survive long
enough to evolve true intelligence. The hard scales of the AAnn gave
protection, and some felt that their closed circulatory systems
compensated for the lack of an exoskeleton.

All these things he studied and mastered, yet he was un­settled in mind
because he also knew that of all the inhabi­tants of the Nursery who
were on the Verge, he alone was unable to settle on a career, to choose
a life work.

Around him, his childhood companions made their choices and were content
as the time grew near. This one to be a chemist, that one a janitorial
engineer, the one on the cradle across from Ryo to become a public
Servitor, another opting for food?processing management.

Only he could not decide, would not decide, did not want to decide. He
wanted only to learn more, to study more.

Then there was no more time for study. There was only time for a sudden
upwelling of fear. His body had been changing for months, subtle tremors
and quivers jostling him internally. He'd felt his insides shift, felt
skin and self tingling with a peculiar tension. An urge was upon him, a
powerful desire to turn inward and explode outward.

The Nurses tried to prepare him for it as best they could, soothing,
explaining, showing him again the chips he'd studied over and over. Yet
the sight of it recorded on screen was clinical and distant, hard to
relate to what was occurring inside his own body. All the chips, all the
infor­mation in the world could not prepare one for the reality.

Worse were the rumors that passed from Nurserymate to Nurserymate in the
dark, during sleeping time, when the adults were not listening. Horrible
stories of gross deformi­ties, of monstrosities put out of their misery
before they had a chance to see themselves in a mirror, which others
said were allowed to survive for a life of miserable study as scientific
subjects, never to be permitted out in society.

The rumors grew and multiplied as fast as the changes in his own body.
The Nurses and special doctors came and went and monitored him
intensively. Around it all, encap­sulating all the mystery and terror
and wonder and hope, was a single word.

Metamorphosis.

The process was something you could not avoid, like death. The genes
insisted and the body obeyed. The larva could not delay it.

He had studied it repeatedly with a fervor he had never applied to
anything else. He watched the recordings, mar­veled at the
transformation. What if the cocoon was wrongly spun? What if he matured
too soon and burst from the cocoon only half formed or, worse yet,
waited too long and smothered?

The Nurses were reassuring. Yes, all those terrible things had happened
once upon a time, but now trained doctors and metamorphic engineers
stood by at all times. Modern medicine would compensate for any mistake
the body might make.

The day came and he hadn't slept for four days before it. His body felt
nervous and ready to burst. Incomprehen­sible feelings possessed him. He
and the others who were ready were taken from the Nursery. Befuddled
younger larvae watched them go, some filling their wake with cries of
farewell.

"Good?bye, Ryo ... Don't come out with eight legs!" "See you as an
adult," shouted another. "Come back and show us your hands," cried a
third. "Tell us what color is!"

Ryo knew he wouldn't be returning to the Nursery. Once gone, there was
no reason to return. It would belong to another life, unless he opted
for Nursery work as an adult. He watched the Nursery recede as his
palette traveled in train with the others down the long central aisle.
The Nurs­ery, its friendly?familiar whites and grays, its cradles and
compassion the only companions he'd ever had, all van­ished behind a
tripartite door.

He heard someone cry out, then realized he was the noise­maker. The
medical personnel hushed him, calmed him.

Then he was in a great, high?ceilinged chamber, a dome of glowing
darkness, of perfectly balanced humidity and temperature. He could see
the other palettes being placed nearby, forming a circle. His friends
wiggled and twisted under the gentle glow of special lamps.

On the next palette rested a female named Urilavsezex. She made the
sound indicative of good wishes and friend­ship. "It's finally here,"
she said. "After so long, after all these years. I'm?I'm not sure I know
what to do or how to do it."

"Me either," Ryo replied. "I know the recordings, but how do you tell
when the precise moment is, how do you know when the time is right? I
don't want to make any mistakes."

"I feel ... I feel so strange. Like I?like I have to ... . " She was no
longer talking, for silk had begun to emerge magically from her mouth.
Fascinated, he stared as she began single?mindedly to work, her body
contorting with a flexibility soon to be lost forever. Bending sharply,
she had begun at the base of her body and was working rapidly toward the
head.

Layer upon layer the damp silk rose around her. body, hardening on
contact with the air. Now he could see only her head. The eyes began to
disappear. Around him others had begun to work.

Something heaved inside him and he thought he was going to vomit. He did
not. It was not his stomach that was suddenly, eruptively working, but
other glands and organs. There was a taste in his mouth, not bad at all,
fresh and clean. He twisted, doubled over, working the silk that
ex­truded in a steady, effortless flow as if he'd spun a hundred times
before.

He felt no claustrophobia, a fear unknown to a people who mature
underground. Up, high, higher, around his mouth and eyes now, the cocoon
rose. The upper cap nar­rowed over his head. It was almost closed when a
pair of truhands reached in and down through the remaining gap. Moving
quickly, in time to his mouth movements so as not to become entangled in
the hardening silk, they held a tube that was pressed against his forehead.

The hands withdrew. Nothing else remained to concen­trate on except
finishing, finishing, finishing the work. Then the cocoon was complete
and the sedative that had been injected into him combined with his
physical exhaus­tion to speed him into the Sleep. A dim, fading part of
him knew he would sleep for three whole seasons ...

But it wasn't long at all. Only a few seconds, and sud­denly he was
kicking with a desperate intensity. Out, he thought hysterically, I have
to get out. He was imprisoned, confined in something hard and
unyielding. He shoved and kicked with all his strength. So weak, he was
so terribly weak. Yet?a small crack, there.

The sight renewed his determination and he kicked hard­er, punched with
his hands and began to pull at the pieces that cracked in front of him.
The prison was disintegrating around him. He whistled in triumph, kicked
with all four legs?then sprawled free and exhausted onto a soft floor.

On his thorax the eight spicules pulsed weakly, sucking air. He turned
his head and looked up, using his truhands to brush at the dampness
still clinging to his eyes.

Then other hands were on him, turning him, helping him untangle.
Antiseptic cloths brushed at his eyes and there was a sharp smell of
peppermint. A voice spoke sooth­ingly. "It's all over. Relax, just
relax. Let your body gather its strength."

Instinctively he turned toward the sound of the voice as the last film
masking his eyes was sponged away. A male Thranx looked down at him. His
chiton was deep purple, so he would be quite elderly.

Realization came in a rush. Purple. The adult's chiton was purple, and
purple was a color that had been described to him and now he knew what
it was and the ceramic inlay in the doctor's forehead was a single bar
of silver crossed by two bars of gold and his ommatidia were red with
gold and yellow central bands and they gleamed in the light of the room
and ... and ... It was wonderful.

He looked down at himself, saw the slim body, the seg­mented abdomen,
the four glistening wing cases, vestigial wings beneath, the four
strong, jointed legs spraddled to his left. He raised a truhand, touched
it with a foothand, then repeated the motion with the other pair, then
touched all four sets of four fingers together.

All around him he heard uncertain clicks and whistles as strange voices
struggled to master new bodies. Someone brought a mirror. Ryo looked
into it. Staring back at him was a beautiful blue?green adult, still
damp but drying rap­idly following Emergence. The valentine?shaped head
was cocked to one side. Cream?white feathery antennae flut­tered and
smothered him in the most peculiar sensations. Smells, they were; rich,
dark, pungent, musky, glowing, va­nilla. The smells of the postcocoon
recovery room, of his metamorphosed friends. He knew he'd been asleep
not a few minutes or seconds but for more than half a year, that his
body had changed and matured from a pulpy, barely conscious white thing
into a gloriously streamlined adult.

He tried to gather his legs beneath him and found ready hands on either
side, helping him up. "Easy there ... don't try to rush yourself," a
voice told him.

Erect, he turned and discovered a wide window. On the other side stood a
host of excited, mature Thranx. Ryo recognized the markings of two, his
sire and dame.

They were no longer kindly gray shapes. They had color now. Evidentially
they recognized him, for they made greeting signs at him. He returned
them, realizing that he now possessed the means for doing so.

The hands left him. He stood by himself on all fours, abdomen stretched
out behind him, thorax and then bthorax inclined upward with his head
topping all. He looked back over his shoulder, down at his body, then
down at the floor. He stepped carefully off the soft padding onto the
harder outside ring. Experimentally, he walked in a slow circle.

"Very good, Ryozenzuzex." It was the elderly doctor who'd supervised his
Emergence. "Don't rush yourself. Your body knows what to do."

Around Ryo his companions were taking experimental deep breaths,
cleaning their eyes, testing legs and fingers, females wiggling their
shining ovipositors, extending and recoiling them..

I can walk, he thought delightedly. I can see colors. He sensed the
pressure of air around him and his brain sorted the implications. I can
faz, and I can smell, and I can still hear. He thanked those who'd
assisted him and marveled at the clarity of his speech; sharp clicks,
beautifully modu­lated whistles?all the intricate convolutions of Low
Thranx. Years of study paid off now.

He marveled at that, too, his four mandibles moving smoothly against
each other as he made sounds of pure pleasure. Only one thing hung in
his thoughts to mar his happiness: his body was complete but his future
was not, for he still had not the vaguest idea what he wanted to do with
himself.

Eventually he drifted into agricultural services, for he felt a positive
joy at finally being able to go Above and, unlike his highly gregarious
fellow citizens, took pleasure in working outside the town.

He drowned his personal uncertainties and confusion in work. Pushed by
his clan, he took as premate a bright and energetic female named
Falmiensazex. Life settled into a comfortable, familiar routine. His
clan and family ceased to worry about him, and the old, nagging
indecision faded steadily until it was nearly forgotten.


  Chapter Two

 

It was the midday of Malmrep, the third of Willow?wanes five seasons and
the time of High Summer. The weather was rich with moisture and the air
rippled with heat.

Ryo checked the readout on the console. Two assistants accompanied him
on the scouting expedition into the jun­gle. They were to survey the
feasibility of planting two thousand bexamin vines.

He'd argued long and patiently with the Innmot local council who had
intended to plant the newly drained and cleared land in ji bushes. Ryo
insisted that it was time to diversify local operations further and that
bexamin vine, which produced small hard berries of deep ocher hue, was
the most suitable candidate for planting.

The berry fruit was useless, but the single seed that lay at the center
of each, when crushed and mixed with water and a protein additive,
produced a wonderfully sweet syrup that was nearly as nutritious as it
was tasty. But the fifteen­meter?long vines required more attention that
the most del­icate ji bush. Nevertheless, the council voted three to two
in favor of his suggestion.

Ryo was quite conscious of how much was riding on the success of this
planting. While failure would not shatter his solid reputation within
the Company, a good bexamin crop would considerably enhance it. Whether
a grand triumph was a good idea he wasn't sure, but he didn't seem to be
progressing in any other directions. So he thought he might as well rise
within the Company structure.

"Bor, Aen," he said to his two assistants, both of whom were older than
he, "break out the transit sighters. We're going to lay a line down that
way." With right foothand and truhand he gestured to his left, to the
northeast.

They acknowledged the order by unpacking the instru­ments and fixing
them to the proper mounts on the side of the crawler. Ryo made sure the
stingers were unstrapped and ready for use in case they should meet with
an errilis.

But nothing sprang from the tangled vegetation to chal­lenge them as
they powered up the instruments. Minutes passed and Bor was removing a
reflective marker from its case when an explosion threw him violently to
the crawler deck. The concussion bent the thinner trees eastward. Vines
and creepers were torn free of their branches. Only his grip on the
steering pylon enabled Ryo to maintain his footing.

During the silence that followed, the three of them lay stunned, not
knowing what to make of the violence. Then a frantic cacophony of
screeks and wails, moans and weeping rose from the startled inhabitants
of the jungle as they recovered from their own shock.

A trio of splay?footed inwicep birds ran past the crawler, their
meter?wide webbed feet barely tickling the swamp water, their necks held
parallel to the surface and their thin blue tails stretched out behind
them for balance.

"Ovipositors acute!" muttered Bor. "What was that?" As if to punctuate
the query there was another roar, less cataclysmic but still strong
enough to rattle the treetops.

Both assistants looked to Ryo for an explanation, but he could only
stare south, the way they'd come, and perform instinctive gestures of
befuddlement. "I've no idea. It al­most sounds as if the generator nexus
went up."

"A collision at the transport terminal perhaps," sug­gested Aen.

"Not possible." Bor made a gesture of assurance. He was the eldest of
the trio. "Only a monitor breakdown for the northern sector of the
continent would allow such a disas­ter. Even if that came to pass I
can't visualize any collision of modules producing such an explosion."

"That would depend on what they were carrying," said Ryo, "but I agree
with you. A more likely source of such energy would be the Reducer
complex south of town where they distill fuel alcohols."

Aen concurred. "We'd best hurry back and see what we can do to help.
There may be fire in the burrows."

"I have clanmates who work at the Reducer." Bor was no less concerned
than his friends.

"And I," added Aen.

Ryo gunned the engine of the crawler. Broad exterior treads spun in
opposite directions. The vehicle turned on its axis and Ryo sent it
rumbling back down the path they'd crunched through the raw jungle. Ooze
and water sprayed from the speeding machine's flanks as Bor and Aen
hur­riedly restowed the survey equipment.

A fresh shock awaited them as they reached the edge of the jungle and
were about to touch the farthest of the plantation access roads. Two
large shuttlecraft of peculiar mul­tiwinged design were resting there.
In landing they'd made a ruin of several neatly tended fields of weoneon
and asfi.

The local airport was south of Paszex, a fact that Ryo could not
reconcile with the presence in his familiar fields of the two strange
ships. It was the older Bor who roughly took the controls from him and
hurriedly backed the crawl­er into the cover of the jungle.

The action ended Ryes immobility, if not his confusion. "I don't
understand. Is it some kind of emergency? Is that why they didn't set
down at the port and ... ?"

Bor interrupted him, pragmatism assuming sway over politeness.

"Those are not Thranx, or anything else friendly. They are AAnn
shuttlecraft. Don't you recall them from Learn­ing Time? There has to be
an AAnn warship somewhere in orbit around Willow?wane."

Bor's words brought the segment of study back to Ryo in a rush.

Powerful, antagonistic, and crafty were the words that best described
the endoskeletal space?going AAnn. Their star systems lay farther out
along the galactic plane than the Thranx worlds. Though war had never
been declared between the two races, occasional "mistakes" were made by
individual AAnn commanders who "overstepped their orders." Or so the
AAnn apologies always insisted.

Since the Central government on Hivehom was always practical about such
matters, the errors never led to full­ scale combat. Such isolated
incidents were irritating but rarely outrageous. The Grand Council
therefore chose to protest such incidents through diplomatic channels.

This policy was not much comfort to the three outraged individuals
driving the crawler, an unusual state of affairs among a people normally
respectful of authority.

The trio could not sympathize with diplomats, since all they could see
were two invading craft that had destroyed laboriously groomed fields,
and the plumes of dark black smoke that rose like mutilated ghosts above
Paszex.

"We must do /something." Ryo /stared helplessly through the trees.
Across the fields drifted the hiss of discharging energy weapons mixed
with the lighter crackle of Thranx stingers and an occasional nasty
/cur?rrrupmph!/ from explo­sive shells.

"What can we do?" Bor's tone was one of calm accep­tance. "We do not
have?" His voice rose at the thought and his eyes gleamed like diamonds.
"We do have weap­ons."

Ryo's hands pulled the largest stinger rifle from its hol­ster. He
needed all four to handle it. "Bor, you drive the crawler. Aen, you
navigate and keep watch for the AAnn."

"Pardon," Aen objected, "but in accordance with our re­spective
positions it would be my place to drive, Bor's to shoot, and yours to
navigate."

"Rank is hereby superseded by circumstance." Ryo was checking the charge
on the rifle. It was full. "I order you to disregard position."

"If you wish me to ignore position then you cannot give me an order to
do so," she argued smoothly. Bor settled the argument by plunging the
crawler through the trees onto the field of cab?high asfi. They were
soon submerged in ripe yellow pods just starting to droop from their
green?and­ black?striped stalks.

Noise and gunfire continued to issue from the direction of the town.
That was natural. Also promising, Ryo thought. Having touched down
unopposed in an unpro­tected colonial region, the invaders quite likely
would an­ticipate little in the way of armed resistance. Certainly
nothing as absurd as a counterattack.

Ryo ordered Bor to aim the crawler for the parked shut­tles. Ryo wished
simultaneously for an energy rifle. That would be much more effective
against machinery, the stingers having been designed for use against
living beings.

They approached quite near to the shuttles and still no one appeared to
challenge them. The shuttlecraft were the first true space?going
vehicles Ryo had ever seen. Paszex and Jupiq and even Zirenba did not
rate a spaceport. Only facilities for less powerful suborbital craft.

At Aen's suggestion, Bor swung the crawler sharply left and off the main
cultivation path. Now they were smash­ing crudely through the dense rows
of asfi stalks. Fruit and stalks flew in all directions.

Such casual destruction was normally worthy of severe condemnation, but
under, the circumstances Ryo didn't worry about possible social
consequences. And then, sud­denly and unexpectedly, a single creature
was standing just ahead and to the right of the rapidly advancing crawler.

The AAnn was relieving himself and the abrupt appear­ance of the crawler
was a shock. He stumbled over his short pants and growled unintelligibly.

The blunt, heavy jaws were filled with sharp teeth. A pair of black,
single?lensed eyes peered from high on the two sides of the head. A
single tail curved from behind. The large, clawed feet wore devices that
resembled steel spats. Its short pants were matched by a shirt of dull
color and a helmet forested with electronic sensors.

A thick cord connected a bulky hand weapon to a pow­er pack slung around
the AAnn's waist. The muzzle swung around to point at the onrushing crawler.

Civilized thoughts were subsumed by fury and Ryo never hesitated. Had he
been the average worker, he would have died, but in the swamps Ryo had
acquired reflexes that most hive dwellers lacked.

There was a sharp crack from the stinger and a tiny bolt of electricity
jumped from its tip to strike the AAnn squarely in the chest. The AAnn
convulsed, jumped a me­ter clear of the ground, and fell back twitching.
He was motionless by the time the crawler rumbled past. Now the enormity
of what Ryo had just done finally struck. He'd deliberately slain
another sentient creature. For an instant Ryo was a little shaky.

They could hear anguished, high?pitched whistles from the direction of
Paszex. Primitive instincts overwhelmed the last of thousands of years
of civilization. The hive was being attacked. Ryo was a soldier
defending the burrow entrances. All that mattered now was defense.

By now they were quite close to the nearer of the two shuttlecraft and
Ryo was hunting for a section of the ship that might prove vulnerable to
his weapon. If he'd had an energy rifle he would have begun by shooting
at the multi­ple landing gear or at the transparent crescent that marked
the command cabin above the nose. But these were war­craft. There were
no exposed antennae or exterior engines.

Several armed AAnn stood beneath the nearest wing. They glanced up in
surprise as the crawler rumbled into view. Ryo shot one of them before
the others could move. The group suddenly broke and ran frantically for
the ramp that led from the ground to the belly of the shuttle.

Ryo caught another AAnn with a second bolt halfway up the ramp, watching
coldly as the creature jerked and twisted downward. Several energy beams
reached from the other retreating soldiers toward the crawler but, fired
wildly and in haste, they missed the agile machine as Bor sent it
winding in unpredictable directions.

Now they were crossing under the stern of the first shuttle and
careening toward the second. Ryo sent several shots crackling toward the
twin exhaust jets and then the rocket openings between, hoping to
disable some vital com­ponent. He had no way of knowing if the bursts
were effec­tive.

By this. time panic was giving way to reaction among those on board the
craft. Suddenly a powerful wash of en­ergy radiated from the bow of the
second ship. It carbon­ized the ground ahead and to the left of the
charging crawl­er.

"Turn, turn!" shouted Aen. Bor responded with soft clicking noises
indicating acknowledgment and mild annoy­ance.

The crawler raced for the concealment of some tettoq trees. A second
energy blast seared the earth where the crawler had been heading moments
earlier.

Other rushing, mechanical sounds reached them. Look­ing back over the
stern of the crawler as they disappeared into the shelter of the tettoq
boles, Ryo could make out moving figures hurrying toward the shuttles.
Some were on single?tracked machines that carried soldiers in pairs.
Oth­ers ran on foot. All were pouring out of the town.

The fire from the second shuttle was joined by a flare from the first.
Beams from both swept the tettoq orchard in search of fleeing enemy. One
struck near enough to ex­plode the crawler's rear tread. But by that
time the over­worked vehicle was limping into the far thicker cover
of­fered by the jungle.

Almost reluctantly, a final, fiery burst cut down two massive lugulic
trees, which fell with a ripping crash just to the left of the damaged
crawler, carrying down vines and lesser trees with them. Then a rich,
rising whine filled the air.

"Can you see what they're doing?" Bor asked, maintain­ing as complex an
evasive course as he could manage with the damaged tread. Ryo and Aen
tried to stare through the trees.

"The ramps have been taken in," Ryo said excitedly. "Judging from the
noise, I'd say they're preparing to leave."

"Surely not because of our little diversion?"

"Who knows?" Pride filled Aen's voice. "They were cer­tainly? surprised.
Perhaps they think several dozen of us, mounting deadlier weaponry, are
preparing to attack them."

"Such speculation is unbecoming," Ryo murmured.

"The circumstances support it," she replied.

"Then again," Bor put in, "it may be that their flight has several
possible causes."

"Meaning what?" wondered Ryo.

Bor brought the crawler to a halt and joined them in gazing through the
wall of trees. "Either they have accom­plished whatever evil they
planned for our poor hive or else," and he pointed skyward with a
truhand, "one of the warships that occasionally but regularly visits our
system had received word of this attack and has drawn near."

The whine of the lifting jets achieved a respectable thun­der and* *the
three Thranx watched as the warcraft taxied through more of the fresh
asfi, picked up speed, and grad­ually rose into the eastern sky. Of
defensive aircraft from distant Ciccikalk there was still no sign.

As to whether a Thranx warship had actually arrived on the orbital scene
and prompted the retreat, they would have to wait to find out. The echo
of the jets faded. There was nothing to hint that anything out of the
ordinary had happened, nothing save the columns of black smoke, the
crushed vegetation in the fields, and the faint, awful smell of
something burning.

Paszex had not been completely destroyed. One of the natural advantages
of living underground is that all but the uppermost levels of a
community are relatively impregnable to all but the heaviest weapons.
From their primitive begin­nings the Thranx had always lived beneath the
surface of the earth.

Still, substantial* *and heartrending damage had been done. Besides the
casual destruction of carefully tended or­chards and fields, the hive's
module transport station was twisted, running metal. Many of the air
intakes and venti­lation stacks had been burned away like so much dry
straw. No real military purpose could have been served by such
destruction; it seemed to have been done more for amuse­ment than
tactical advantage.

The hive's communication center and satellite terminal had also been
destroyed, but not before the operators had succeeded in transmitting a
message to Zirenba. From there it was instantly relayed to Ciccikalk,
whence help had been summoned.

Many were dead and every clan had new ancestors to honor. But there were
no recriminations, no days of wail­ing and weeping. Because the water
lines were untouched the Servitor staff could efficiently extinguish all
but the most persistent fires. Because the Servitors. were also
re­sponsible for such diverse functions as keeping the peace and
cleaning up the garbage, restoration and repair were well coordinated
from the beginning.

Families tallied their losses, clanmothers compiled ros­ters of the
dead, while the job of putting Paszex back to­gether again proceeded
smoothly. Since the AAnn had been too busy or too contemptuous to
destroy the synchronous ­orbit communications satellites above
Willow?wane, rees­tablishing contact with the rest of the planet was
simply a matter of placing portable communication discs above the town.

Ryo cared little for such details as he'd raced through the smoke?filled
corridors in search of Fal.

She'd been working in the Nursery. If he'd known that, he wouldn't have
worried so much about her. But he couldn't be sure she was at work when
the AAnn attacked. She could have been anywhere in the hive. It was a
consider­able relief to learn that she was safe and unhurt.

When the first explosions had sounded, followed imme­diately by the
alarms, she'd assisted in the transfer of the larvae to the special
Nursery chambers below the hive's fifth and bottom level. There she and
the other attendants waited out the battle in comparative safety.

The emergency lower Nursery had its own sealed air supply as well as
weapons, and could have held out for three seasons without revealing
itself to long?term invaders. Such security for the young was a holdover
from the Thranx's primitive past. Even after attaining intelligence and
civilization, the Thranx had never forgotten that the most basic
ingredient for the survival of a people is the protection of the young.

Eventually the town learned that the timely arrival of a Thranx warship
had, indeed, forced the hasty AAnn re­treat. That did not prevent Ryo,
Bor, and Aen from being accorded the status due local heroes.

They had been responsible for the deaths of at least three of the
bandits?the local council would not dignify the AAnn by calling them
invaders?and one of the two AAnn shuttles had been destroyed by the
Thranx warship before rendezvous with its mother ship. The Thranx
cap­tain?had ascribed the fatal shot to an improperly supervised gunnery
officer, subsequently "reprimanded." So there was something of a
trade?off, incidentwise. Nevertheless, a few were convinced that the
success was due to Ryo's stinging rifle. But there was now no way to
prove this, so Ryo and his companions naturally refused to accept credit
for it.

That did not keep the hive council from voting them commendations and
thanks. There was even talk of some kind of presentation at the capital.
That never materialized, but weeks later Ryo learned that he had been
nominated for a single crimson star by the grateful colonial
govern­ment, and that the award had been approved by the appro­priate
bureau on Hivehom, in Daret. The star was to be set in his chiton just
behind his left shoulder.

Some military and civilian heroes of great accomplish­ment could boast
twenty and thirty such stars, acquired through long and meritorious
service. A few even carried the coveted yellow sunburst. But thousands
of respected achievers had never received a single such honor. The award
was quite a coup for Ryo's clan, though he cared little for it. Anyone
would have done as he bad, presented with the same options. Nonetheless,
it was argued, it was he who had done it.

As the weeks passed, supplies were air?ferried from Zir­enba, and Jupiq
and Paszex's other sister towns contributed what they could. Medical and
food supplies were the first to arrive in quantity, followed by
technicians, building materials, and sophisticated replacement
components from Ciccikalk.

The damaged fields were soon readied for replanting. New ventilation and
exhaust stacks were quickly set and sealed in place.

The greatest damage was to the module transport ter­minal. Ryo went
there one day to see how repairs were progressing. It was important to
the Company because most of Inmot's local unprocessed produce was
shipped via mod­ule to Zirenba.

The guide tracks on which the magnetic repulsion mod­ules cruised were
still being poured and cast. The thick gray?white plastic would solidify
quickly into a nearly un­breakable, flexible line. New coils were being
sealed into position. Under the critical gaze of a large crew of local
and imported technicians the station was being rebuilt in the most
modern style and much expensive sunglass crystal was used as shielding.

The new station would be larger and more efficient as well as more
attractive than its predecessor, though the citi­zens of Paszex would
gladly have traded it for the old one and a retraction of the cause of
its destruction. Ryo won­dered if the lavish new terminal was the
government's sub­tle apology to the scarred inhabitants.

A big celebration was held when the? first modules ar­rived over the new
track from Jupiq, but Ryo missed the event, being deep in the jungle at
the time. He watched it via screen later that night, saw the dozen
oblong passenger modules link up outside Jupiq to form a single silvery
seg­mented train, then split up outside Paszex to arrive in stately
individual procession.

At least the system was operational again. Goods and individuals could
once more travel freely between Paszex and the rest of Willow?wane. Only
decorative detail re­mained to be added to the terminal. More government
money. More apologies.

A formal clan evening meal was served that night. The clan hall was
utilized and the meal set two timeparts later than normal to allow
everyone time to dress properly. Fine jewelry and inlays were brought
out for the occasion. There were neck pouches and body vests of orange
and silver mesh, pink threadwork so fine that it seemed no hand or
machine could manage the weave. Females and males alike sported inlays
of cerulean and carnelian, obsidian and chal­cedony, faceted gems, fine
ceramic and enamel in curli­cues, triangles, and bars. Most gleamed from
excavations made between mandibles and eyes, though more official
in­serts shone on a few shoulders and necks.

After the meal Ryo's crimson star was awarded in a for­mal ceremony.
The?four?pointed insignia was presented by a minor government
functionary who'd traveled from Zir­enba for the occasion.

The official presented the small transparent case to the venerable
Ilvenzuteck, Ryo's clanmother, who handed it proudly to the inlayer. The
craftswoman set to work with blades and chisels, painlessly excavating a
gap from the chiton of Ryo's left shoulder while the rest of the clan
looked on approvingly.

Permaglue was brushed on the base of the star, which was then carefully
set in place, the metal fitting flush with Ryo's exoskeleton. The
inlayer, an old Thranx, took satis­faction from a perfect fit on the
first attempt. No glue oozed from the edges of the incision. She'd done
this many times before, though mostly with cheap ceramics and rarely
before an audience. She applied a little saliva to shine the star,
inlayer tradition.

The decoration would remain a permanent part now of Ryo's body, for all
to see and admire. If he ever did any traveling, it would be amusing
when strangers asked him in what campaign, during what exploration he'd
achieved the award. He would have to confess that he'd earned it for
acceding to the impulse to prevent belligerent aliens' from knocking
down tettoq trees and asfi bushes.

A loud whistling arose from the assembled clanate, from elders, adults,
and adolescents alike. The whistle of ap­proval rose shrilly and then
snapped off, neatly concluded. Ryo acknowledged it while Fal beamed
proudly at him from her seat nearby.

She looks particularly beautiful tonight, he thought, with the simple
yellow stripes in her forehead and the three pink dots topping each. She
wore matching neck and body attire of violet iridescent material. Violet
and silver thread had been applied with temporary glue around her
b?thorax and spicules. Silver wires formed double helixes around both
arching ovipositors, an agonizingly long task at which her brother and
friends had helped.

For a moment Ryo thought to boldly announce their in­tention to mate,
but of course he could not do that without consulting her first, though
he knew she would agree in­stantly. It was just as well, he thought.
Lovely as she was, he still wasn't certain he was ready for that.

So he stood, accepting the accolades of his clan, the four?pointed
crimson star shining on his shoulder. As he thought of the lady who
loved him and the certain promo­tion to the Inmot local council, he was
quiet, contempla­tive.

No one in the assembled crowd of friends and relatives could have
guessed that the thought uppermost in Ryozenzuzex's mind was this: he
did not hate but, instead, greatly envied the AAnn of the shuttles ...


  Chapter Three

 

The ship was nearly as young as her captain. Six great oval projection
fans formed a circle in front of it, attached to the octahedral bulk of
the craft proper by long metal corridors and a webwork of struts and braces.

Each fan generated a portion of the posigravity field, a crude precursor
of the KK drive that was to come follow­ing the Amalgamation. This field
pulled the ship through Space Plus, for all that it was ungainly,
unstreamlined, and resembled an angular metallic squid. Generation of
the po­sigrav field used a great deal of energy and Space Plus was no
place for timid physics. It was a region inhabited by ghost stars, where
visible light turned diffuse and X?ray stars became visible. Other
peculiarities were normal to Space Plus, the region of theory wherein
the ships of Deep Space uncertainly made their way. A captain had to be
ready to deal with all sorts of manipulative physical phe­nomena, some
that were not matter, others that were not energy.

Below Space Plus lay normal space ("below" here signi­fying a place more
colloquial than relativistic), where could be found predictable stars
and habitable planets. Below /that/ were the unnatural atomic and
subatomic va­garies of Space Minus, or Nullspace, a region of eternity
best not touched, where tachyons and other nonexistent particles became
real and where ships and messages some­times vanished more utterly than
if they'd dropped into a collapsar. Nullspace was, according to a most
respected Thranx theosophical physicist, "the inside?out of real."

Captain Brohwelporvot strolled the control room of the /Zinramm. /Though
he was on his third expedition for Deep Space Research he was still
nervous about his first command. Relaxed in their saddles, his crew
formed a cir­cle around him.

Through the forward observation port the distant purple glow of the
posigravity drive field marked the burrow the /Zinramm /was tunneling
through Space Plus. They were a quarter of a season out from Hivehom
system. In addition to verifying and extending the charts for this
considerable section of space, they'd entered and studied two new
plane­tary systems, one holding a world that was marginally
in­habitable?a discovery by itself sufficient to make this the most
productive of the three expeditions Broh had so far directed.

Still, as they had time left, he drove ship and crew deeper through the
Arm. Nothing ever quite satisfied Broh, no discovery sated his curiosity
or sense of duty. His internal drive was one of the reasons he'd been
selected to command the Zinramm when his years did not seem to merit it.

The scanner made a sign toward his captain with a foot­hand, the other
foothand poised delicately above lower con­tacts and his truhands
remaining on the controls.

"What is it, Uvov?"

"Object, sir. Extrasystemic, twenty squares right of our present course.
Moving at moderate speed and inclined slightly up from the plane off the
ecliptic."

"Intercept course?" Broh stared over the scanner's shoul­der at
quadruple colored screens.

"Three timeparts," replied the scanner, after a moment's calculating.

"Identification?"

"Impossible to say at this distance and velocity, sir. It's quite small.
Wandering asteroid perhaps. Cometary nu­cleus. Or? ..." He left the
always hopeful question unan­swered.

Broh said nothing. Such gaps were what the journey of the Zinramm were
supposed to fill. He considered. They were in no hurry to get anywhere
and any object traveling this far out from a system was worth a casual
inspection. Turning, he called across the disk of the room.

"Emynt."

"Sir," the pilot replied, swiveling slightly to look back at him.

"Maintain course for two timeparts, then drop to normal space."

"Yes, sir." She turned to her instrumentation and com­menced programming.

"Defense?"

"Ready, sir."

"Place ship on third?degree alert, one degree of uncer­tainty.
Personnel, sound stations for drop to normal space."

The bridge was a quiet maze of moving multidigited arms and legs as the
command crew scrambled smoothly to comply with the sudden rush of
orders. There was no con­fusion, no uncertainty to the preparations. Not
like the first time, Broh thought ruefully. Now everyone knew precisely
what was expected. They worked without hint of excite­ment, the thrill
of such encounters having been dulled by numerous similar incidents that
invariably proved to be of minor scientific utility.

Soon the computer called up the count from engineering. "Bite ... one,
two, three ... ," and on toward eight and the drop from Space Plus. Broh
braced himself in the cap­tain's saddle.

There was a violent wrench, the ship shuddered like a leaf in a
whirlwind, and Broh was certain his insides would spill out through his
mouth. The nausea passed with merci­ful speed and no unseemly
regurgitation. The forward ob­servation port showed relaxed, normal
stars of recognizable color and shape instead of the ghostly auras that
had ear­lier marked their location. Nothing else was visible via the
port, but the search screens were alive with information. "Scanner," he
called briskly, "do you have the object?"

"Coming up on screen one, sir."

The large screen set on the wall to the left of the port flickered
momentarily. Then the subject of their temporary drop from Space Plus
became visible and the attitudes of those who could spare a moment from
their assignments changed drastically. Startled clicks echoed through
the bridge. The object was not an asteroid, or a comet head.

Analysis confirmed what the eye supposed: the object was largely
metallic. Further information merely con­firmed the obvious. The
artifact was a ship. Three cones formed the front section of the vessel,
attached by struts and beams to a sphere. The arrangement hinted at a
differ­ent, but not radically so, propulsive system.

The senior science council had arrived on the bridge, drawn from their
studies by the announcement of the forthcoming sublight encounter. Now
they crowded next to the captain's position and stared at the screen.
There were three of them, in age all quite senior to Broh. They waited,
however, for him to make the proper command inquiries.

Now more than ever in his brief and comparatively uneventful career,
Broh was aware of his lack of experi­ence. Not that he would permit that
to show. In some ways the science council outranked him. He was grateful
for that. It would allow him to ask obvious questions without seeming
stupid.

"AAnn or related design?" he asked sharply.

"No," replied the first observer. She studied the screen intently. "At
least, not of any AAnn designs I've ever seen. The projection fans?for
such we must assume they are quite different from ours or the AAnn's,
though some­what more similar to the AAnn's."

"Also the number of projection units?three?is the same as the AAnn
employ." The second observer pointed toward the image and described
silhouettes in the air. "But see, they are far more flat than ours or
the AAnn's. I won­der how that affects the field that wraps around the
ship in Space Plus." He muttered about the displacement of reality and
other arcane matters that were as much solipsis­tic and metaphysical as
hard science.

Of course, there was no firm boundary between reality and unreality when
one was dealing with such concepts as Space Plus and Space Minus. When
brilliant generalists like the three observers got together, even
theology some­times took on the aspect of a hard science.

The alien vessel grew steadily larger and magnification was
correspondingly reduced until finally they found themselves looking at a
real?size image.

"Try signaling," the third observer suggested.

"What frequency?" Communications asked.

"All," Broh said. "Try standard hive channels first, then AAnn frequencies."

"But the first observer already has said it's not a recog­nizable AAnn
type, sir."

Broh ignored the insubordination. "It may be a new type," he responded.
"Or an ally of the AAnn we know nothing of."

"If it's an ally," the scanner commented, "it's been badly treated."
Screen two, to the right of the viewport, suddenly came to life with a
close?up of the alien's fore section. Two of the three cone?shaped units
had been badly damaged. Broh requested an analysis and opinion of the
damage.

"It could have been meteoric material, but I think not," said the
analyzer. "See the way the metal folds and twists back on itself there
at the leading edges? And there, along the support beams, surely that's
the mask of heavy?energy weaponry."

"Possibly," murmured the first observer. She was more interested now in
the after section of the ship.

"No response to inquiries, sir," Communications an­nounced. Broh mulled
that over. Coupled with the signs of severe damage, everything indicated
that they were looking at a dead ship, a wandering derelict. Ire put the
thought to the council.

"It could be a clever trap," suggested the second ob­server. "The damage
could have been falsified to lure us close enough to be taken before we
had a chance to signal. Such a ploy would be typical of the AAnn."

"If that's the case," said Broh, "we'll know in less than a timepart."

If the alien was a thangner hiding in its silken burrow, it was a most
patient one. It continued to coast as they approached, its engines
apparently quite dead. Not a hint of energy issued from the three cone
projectors.

"If that's a decoy, it's fooled me," Communications mut­tered.

Broh frowned inwardly. It was not the communicator's place to offer such
a comment. He would have to speak with the officer later.

"Still nothing on all bands," the communicator said coolly. "Trying
unassigned frequencies now. I'll run the whole spectrum."

The images on screen two shifted. "There appears," the analyzer pointed
out judiciously, "to be damage to the main body of the vessel as well as
to the projection units."

Broh made a clicking sound, gestured. "Bring us around toward the main
body, then."

Slowly the /Zinramm/ changed direction toward the stern of the strange
craft. Now they could see a few weak lights glowing from behind intact
ports. These were located mostly near the upper rearmost section of the
ship. The ports were circular instead of triangular, but no one on the
/Zinramm's /bridge made the obvious lewd comments. The main body was
larger than that of the /Zinramm/? larger than that of most Thranx
vessels?but, save for the few dimly illuminated ports, the alien craft
was dark as night.

Broh whistled into the communicator that hung from his headset to
activate the proper section of the Zinramm's internal communications
system. "Outside? Anzeljermeit, I want a burrowing party of five."

/"Five, /Captain?" came the querulous acknowledgment.

"Five should be sufficient. I do not believe the damage to this alien is
camouflage. And if it is, it will make no difference how many are in the
group."

"Arms, sir?"

Broh hesitated. For this he had prescribed procedure to draw upon.

"Small arms only. In one?tenth of a timepart. Lock six."

"We'll be ready, sir."

Broh rose from his saddle, turned to the science council. "I have no
power to compel you but I would like it very much if you?"

The second observer cut him off* *with a concomitant ges­ture of
apology. "This is what we live for, Captain. Such a moment is the joy of
a life. You could not keep us from boarding that marvelous mystery if
you wished to. There is hardly a need to ask us to accompany you."

"I thought as much." Broh's gesture indicated mild amusement mixed with
high gratification. "The law re­quires that I ask."

"Of course," said the third observer. "Let us not waste any more time in
discussion of the accepted."

The five Outside specialists were suited and waiting in lock six when
Broh and the science council arrived. The /Zinramm/ would not dock with
the alien vessel. Broh was not that confident of the derelict's
harmlessness, so the party moved from the lock into a small
shuttlecraft, one normally used for conveying explorers to the surface
of a solid body.

The lock sealed behind them. Anzeljermeit, leader of the Outsiders,
fired the shuttle's engines very briefly. The shuttle slipped free of
its compartment and out into space, angling toward the intimidating bulk
of the alien ship. An­zeljermeit's four subordinates struggled to
maintain the pose of professional indifference, but there was no
mistak­ing their tense posture.

The alien was perhaps half again the size of the /Zin­ramm/. The perfect
spherical body was unsettling to those on the shuttle. They were used to
ships, those of the AAnn as well, that boasted a comforting alignment of
planes and sharp angles. A vessel shaped as a smooth globe was
some­thing most disturbing.

At least the skin of the alien was marred by the expected projections.
Antennae and samplers were more or less recognizable. Several blunt
nozzles were not, though if they were anything but the business ends off
weapons Broh would have been much surprised. They remained comfort­ingly
angled away from the approaching shuttle and the motionless mass of the
now distant /Zinramm./

Anzeljermeit carefully adjusted the attitude of the shut­tle, directing
it around the flank of the alien and toward the stern. It did not take
long to locate what had to be an exterior lock. The officer barely
touched the maneuvering rockets. Tiny puffs of gas flared from the
shuttle's sides, moving, it closer to the alien before firming its
position in space.

The lock opening was no less aberrant than the shape of the alien ship.
It was a squared ellipsoid, nothing like the familiar triangular hatches
on the /Zinramm. It /looked a lot more like an AAnn airlock. The several
similarities were beginning to trouble Broh. The shape of the lock was
the first unarguable sign they had that the aliens might physi­cally be
related to the AAnn.

Boarding would be no problem. The tube that would ex­tend from the
shuttle was flexible and would conform itself to the alien opening while
sealing tightly. Broh gave the necessary orders.

The Outside officer adjusted the shuttle slightly, so that it presented
its left side to the stern of the alien. The board­ing tube extended and
secured itself to the alien craft. There was a pause while checks were
performed.

"Mating completed," Anzeljermeit announced tersely.

There was no reaction from the alien ship. Now Broh had to make a more
difficult decision. To enter the alien they might have to blow the lock
cover, an action that could be interpreted as offensive. Since no hint
of life had manifested itself from the ship, he'd come to believe she
was truly a derelict, floating free, engines as dead as her crew
following an armed encounter.

But the few feeble lights showed that some power re­mained on board.
Even a dead ship might boast automatic defenses. Therefore he dearly
wanted to avoid having to blow the lock.

Anzeljermeit left two of his people in charge of the shut­tle to relay
information from the burrowing party to the /Zinramm's/ secondary
scientific complement. Broh knew that in the event of trouble they were
to return immedi­ately to the /Zinramm/. While interrank relationships
were reasonably casual on board Thranx ships, discipline was ab­solute
when invoked.

The suited burrowing party entered the shuttle's lock, which closed
behind them. The three sections of the outside door slid apart and they
floated into the connection tube.

Ahead lay the exterior of the alien ship. The skin was painted black or
composed of some black metal. It did not shine the comfortable silver of
the /Zinramm/. It was with some relief that Broh had noticed earlier it
was also not the garish orange of an AAnn craft. Crowded together in the
narrow confines of the boarding tube they pondered what to do next.

The Outsiders had brought solid charges for blowing the lock if that
proved necessary. Broh let the science council take its time studying
the lock configuration.

They quickly discovered several hinged covers, which when raised,
revealed contact disks. These were perfuncto­rily inspected. The
observers conferred, then the first spoke to Broh via suit communicator.
"We believe these to be simple, if bulky, controls for operating the
lock, as should be present on any such entryway in the event of internal
power failure."

"They could also," the second observer noted grudg­ingly, "be a method
for inducing anyone trying to enter to blow himself toward the nearest
star."

"An assumption that presupposes both paranoia and bel­ligerence," said
the third observer. "Two qualities which I would prefer not to ascribe
to the builders of this vessel."

"We're not debating preferences, but actualities," said the/ /second
observer. "However, I naturally defer to the majority opinion." He moved
toward the rear of the tube. "You activate the controls. I will wait here."

The third observer made a, gesture indicative of accep­tance coupled
with hopeful anticipation and just a smidgen of mild amusement. She
turned and reached with a suited truhand for the lower of the two
exposed disks. The Out­side officer and his companions waited
impassively, not having been allowed to retreat.

Broh's inclination was to agree with the majority of ob­servers, but he
wished their decision to try the lock controls had been unanimous.

As the third observer depressed the disk the lock hatch promptly slid up
into the wall of the ship. A brightly lit chamber was exposed beyond. A
second hatch showed ahead. They were indeed entering an airlock, then.

It was more than large enough to hold them all, includ­ing the
recalcitrant second observer who floated behind, grumbling but willing
to admit he'd been wrong.

Corresponding disks were sunk in the interior wall. Their function was
simple to divine. When all seven bur­rowers were inside, the third
observer depressed the coun­terpart to the outside disk. The exterior
lock door slid shut.

There was faint motion in the lock. Sound sensors de­tected the whistle
of escaping gas. Lock pressurization was automatic. Suit instrumentation
immediately analyzed the gas. It was a pleasant surprise to discover
that the atmosphere that had been injected into the lock was
tech­nically breathable.

"Oxygen breathers like us," murmured the first observer as she settled
to the floor. "Artificial gravity perhaps a tiny bit stronger than ours."

"Also like the AAnn," Broh pointed out.

"Not exactly like us." The second observer was studying his suit
instruments. "Check your climatology readings."

The atmosphere that now filled the lock was breathable, but desperately
cold and almost unbelievably dry. Since the air had been provided
promptly there was no reason to as­sume that either factor was the
result of a malfunction in the ship's systems, though such a possibility
could not be ruled out.

Broh stared disbelievingly at his humidity indicator, which registered
close to zero. As the third observer pointed out, that was
disconcertingly like the climate the AAnn were known to prefer.

"That much is true," the second observer admitted. "The lack of
reasonable moisture in the air here is indeed similar to suspected AAnn
home planetery conditions. However, the temperature in this lock is low
enough to kill them even faster than it would doom us."

"Maybe," the first suggested, "this ship's .automatic monitors are
functioning properly save for a breakdown in the heating elements."

"That's possible," Broh agreed, breaking into the learned discussion
lest it grow too esoteric, "but as near as I can tell everything else
seems to be functioning properly. I fear we must assume that holds true
for the temperature controls the same as everything else."

"A frozen race," the Outside officer muttered.

"Of course," the first observer continued after making a polite gesture
in recognition of the officer's comment coupled with mild condescension
toward one of inferior mental powers, "allies of the AAnn would not
necessarily have to enjoy the same climate as the AAnn, any more than
their ships would have to be based on similar designs."

"True enough." The third looked thoughtful. "I've been fortunate enough
to have had the chance to study the inte­rior of a captured AAnn vessel.
I can say that insofar as airlocks are concerned, the differences
between that ship and this one are considerable. I reserve final
judgment un­til we have seen more of this one, of course."

There was a crackling in Broh's headset, an urgent flurry of inquisitive
clicks and whistles.

"Captain, sir?" said a slightly distorted voice.

"Speaking." Broh's reply was sharper than he intended.

"It's nothing specific, sir." Broh recognized the voice of the Outsider
manning the shuttle. "But we hadn't heard from you since instruments
showed that you'd boarded the alien and closed the lock door behind you."

"My error," Broh replied. "We should have checked back with you sooner.
The builders of this ship remain un­known and," he glanced for
confirmation at the science council, "at least so far there is nothing
to indicate they are AAnn or AAnn?allied. You may relay this very
tentative and preliminary information back to the /Zinramm/."

"And happy they'll be to hear it, too?tentative though it may be," the
other Outsider on the shuttle commented.

"We've spent enough time here." Broh moved to the hatch barring the far
end of the lock and studied the con­trols. They were duplicates of those
outside the ship. He touched what should have been the proper one for
opening the door. Nothing happened. He tried the other, with the same
disappointing result.

"Try them in opposite sequence," suggested the first ob­server. Broh did
so and was rewarded when the hatch slid sideways into the wall. The
outer hatch had retracted up­ward. Broh wondered idly if the disparity
of direction was functional, aesthetic, or designed to satisfy some
sense he could not imagine.

A corridor gleamed beyond, brightly lit and beckoning. They cautiously
exited the lock, pausing repeatedly to mar­vel at various peculiar
aspects of the walls and ceiling. The science council continually had to
be urged onward, or they would have spent a timepart arguing over the
function and purpose of each tiny control or extrusion.

As they moved deeper into the alien ship the party en­countered smoke.
Broh and the Outsiders kept their hands close to their holstered
stingers, their attention on each new doorway and opening.

The lighting was harsh, though whether this was due to damage or
intention they had no way of knowing. Broh wondered at the sources of
the smoke. They paused at one complex instrument panel that was a
flickering galaxy of exploding sparks and melted metal. Broh studied the
ru­ined panel and the metal that had run beneath it, then moved on to
examine a similar console that was still intact. It boasted a screen in
its center and bulky controls below.

More interesting was the saddle set into the deck before it. It had to
be a saddle, since it seemed an unlikely place to put an abstract
sculpture. It was much higher off the floor than any Thranx could
manage. Not that they could have rested on it even if it had been lower.
It was impossi­bly small and flat, yet very different from the AAnn
sad­dles the science council had studied.

"I don't see how: that could belong to any large intelli­gent creature,"
the first observer said. "It seems too small to support anything but a
krep?size animal, yet everything else aboard this ship hints that it was
built and used by large creatures. The dichotomy is puzzling."

"It seems certain that whoever they are, they're com­pletely alien,"
Broh said. The Outsiders' nervousness in­creased.

Every screen they encountered thereafter was placed well above normal
eye level. Only standing on one's hind legs would enable one to see the
topmost controls. Every­thing save the peculiar stunted saddles pointed
to creatures larger than the Thranx or the AAnn.

They moved deeper into the ship, pausing at regular in­tervals to check
in with the two Outsiders running the shut­tle.

The one thing Broh had wished for and which they hadn't encountered were
alien atmosphere suits. Used, per­haps, while abandoning ship? Stored
elsewhere? He didn't know, but his mental reconstruction of this ship's
crew was not very pleasant.

Still, his conceptions might be way out of line. The drin­dars of
Hivehom, for example, though primitive dumb creatures, could conceivably
fit the alien saddles.

They entered a new chamber, much larger than any they'd seen so far, and
found long platforms and dozens of small saddles that were not fastened
to the decking.

"A communal meeting hall," suggested the second ob­server. "For the
carrying out of clan rituals, perhaps?"

"Maybe," the third murmured, "but something makes me think otherwise."

They walked through it into still another room of uncer­tain function.
It was filled with a profusion of portable de­vices. Rummaging through
cabinets that opened to the touch, one of the subordinate Outsiders
discovered a collec­tion of what appeared to be personal items.

"Utensils, possibly," suggested the first observer.

They crowded around the tiny collection of alien arti­facts. There were
open?ended containers and low?relief con­cave slabs of vitreous
material. Nowhere did Broh see any­thing resembling a drinking vessel.
Surely the crew of the ship consumed liquids, Broh thought.

They found other devices of obscure purpose, but a whole drawer was full
of knives, something with an oval scoop attached to one end, and a
multipronged tool that resembled a miniature fishing spear.

"I believe their intake would not prove entirely bizarre," said the
second observer. "It's possible we might be able to eat some of the same
food."

That brought forth a thoroughly disgusted noise from one of the
Outsiders, for which he promptly performed a gesture of third?degree
apology, mixed with two degrees of embarrassment.

"An experiment that I would prefer to forgo for now," Broh said,
fighting to conceal his own distaste at the thought.

Since there was no other way out of the room they re­turned the way
they'd come, through the chamber of the long platforms and inflexible
stunted saddles, and into the corridor beyond.

They continued on into the bowels of the ship and soon found a new
chamber filled with fresh mysteries. There were multiple platforms, but
they differed considerably from those in the meeting hall. There were
also small vi­deoscreens and a great many garish objects decorating the
walls. To everyone's delight, these platforms resembled nothing so much
as enormous sleeping lounges.

"The first real indication of any physical similarity," said the Outside
officer. "Perhaps they are more like us than we thought."

"Then how do you explain those impossible little sad­dles?" asked one of
the two subordinates.

"I don't," the officer replied. Without waiting for word from a member
of the science council he elected to climb up onto one of the lounges,
that being as good a name for them as anything.

"How is it?" the subordinate wondered.

"Almost normal. Comfortable, even." He glanced over at his captain.
"Permission to remove suits, sir."

"I don't know ..."

The first observer nudged him. "Let him. The experi­ment should be
tried. The air tests acceptably well."

"If you concur," Broh said reluctantly. He signed to the officer.

Carefully Anzeljermeit unsealed the right?center portion of his suit,
exposing his thorax to the alien air. After an anxious pause, he did the
same to the seals covering his spicules on the left side. His thorax pulsed.

"Reaction?" inquired the third observer.

The reply came as a momentary gasp, grew slowly stronger and more
normal. "Dry enough to rust your blood. It's a bit of a shock." He
unsealed and flipped back the upper section of the suit, including the
transparent head­piece, and sat unsuited to the shoulders. His antennae
flut­tered, then spread unrestrained as he sampled the air.

"You can smell the dryness, and the cold chills your guts, but those
details aside, it is quite breathable, as the instruments indicated. Add
a lot of moisture to it and cook it some and I'd say it would be
comfortable enough. What is your opinion, Quoz?"

The Outsider standing next to the lounge unsealed the upper third of her
own suit and flipped it back. Now two pairs of antennae waggled freely
in the chamber.

"I agree," she finally said, with somewhat more enthusi­asm than her
superior. "It's quite palatable."

The first observer began to unseal her own suit. "I, for one, am tired
of canned air. It's not every day one has the opportunity to sample an
alien atmosphere."

Soon they were all working at their suit seals, keeping the lower
section in place and well heated. Lounging on the peculiar alien
platform, Anzeljermeit watched them easily, pleased in the knowledge
that he'd been the one with the courage to go first. Then he made a
gesture of uncertainty compounded by concern and sat up fast.

"Where's Iel?" He looked toward the far corners of the chamber, his gaze
coming to rest on the doorway leading out into the corridor beyond.

The other Outsider turned a slow circle. "I don't know, sir,"

The officer slid off the lounge. "I'll have his rank for this. Wandering
off without authorization."

"Gently go, sir. You know Iel. Impulsive and easily bored. Well, maybe
not impulsive, but incautious."

"That may not matter much on board the /Zinramm/, but here we?"

Distant, frantic whistling sounded from somewhere far away.

"Quickly!" the officer commanded.

Suits were hurriedly resealed and the burrowing party rushed in the
direction of the whistles. They hadn't gone far from the chamber with
the lounges when Outsider lel rounded a far corner, running on all sixes
as if the Ruler of the Distant Darkness itself were after him. On their
suit communicators they could hear his frantic breathing, his breaths
coming in short, tight gasps.

"So something's given you a good scare, has it?" said Anzeljermeit
sharply, not immediately noticing the attitude with which the Outsider
held himself, antennae folded flat back inside his suit, mandibles
clenched so tightly together Broh thought they must shatter. "Serves you
damn well right, too, for going off on?" His voice faded like a fast­
moving breeze.

A thing had materialized in the corridor behind the terri­fied Iel.**

It raced in pursuit of him, moving with horridly fluid loping movements
of its lower limbs. The massive shape towered over the diminutive Iel.
It seemed to fill the corri­dor, though in reality it was not all that
large. Its voice was a deep?throated thunder that reminded Broh of
Hivehom's more dangerous carnivores.

Surely that's what it had to be, a beast escaped from some on?board
holding pen or traveling zoo. But it wore clothing, and moved with more
than feral purpose. Despite what his revolted insides shouted, Broh knew
it had to be one of the alien crew.

It continued to utter incomprehensible noises as it chased Iel. Broh
drew his stinger but determined not to fire until the last possible moment.

At that point the abomination noticed the burrowing party crowded
together at the end of the corridor. It halted abruptly, generated a
tremendously violent sound that rat­tled Broh's head, and vanished back
the way it had come.

Outsider lel finally reached them and skidded to a stop. He started to
say something. Then a shadow darkened his ommatidia and he keeled over
on his left side. His superior and Broh bent over him, dividing their
attention between the unconscious Iel and the now deserted corridor.

Broh watched while Anzeljermeit inspected his subordi­nate. "He doesn't
appear to be injured, sir," the officer finally concluded. "His suit is
intact and the seals don't seem to have been breached?but it's difficult
to tell, since they're self?repairing. In any case, his breathing is
normal, if labored."

"You mean he does not appear to have been injured physically." The third
observer was gazing with a mixture of awe and revulsion down the
corridor. He made a gesture of astonishment mixed with fourth?degree worry.

"I don't wonder that he went comatose," the first ob­server said. " Did
you see the thing clearly? What an im­possible organism!"

"Surely it was one of the crew." Broh rose to his feet.

"Much as I would like to think otherwise, I fear I must concur," said
the second observer.

The captain's attention was on the still empty corridor. "No telling how
many of them there are. However, we must keep in mind that this one
carried no weapon."

"If that was an attempt at a friendly greeting," said Anzeljermeit,
"I'll eat my left leg."

"Which one?" asked Quoz.

"Both of them. And without spices."

"I'm afraid there's no question but that violence was di­rected toward
let," Broh murmured regretfully. Things had not gone as he'd hoped. He
rechecked his stinger's charge. "Fall back to the shuttle. Have the
/Zdnramm /send over an­other. I want a full complement of our Outsiders
here."

"Yes, sir." Anzeljermeit whistled into his suit pickup preparatory to
contacting his unit. ?

"Rifles as well as small arms this time," Broh added reluctantly.

"Your pardon, Captain," the third observer said, "but is that wise at
this point? Admittedly I would not have liked to exchange positions with
that poor fellow a moment ago, but surely we have matured beyond mere
shape?fear? We must try to contact them."

"So we will," Broh agreed, "but I must note, with all due respect, that
you observers are my responsibility, as are all on board the /Zinramm/.
I/ /am instructed according to procedure to use the most extreme caution
should any new alien intelligence be encountered. I have seen nothing
thus far that would induce me to relax such procedure." He continued to
stare down the corridor, trying to visualize once again the horror that
had charged at them. "Least of all would I relax it now."

"As you command," said the third observer. "While it is not
complementary to what is supposed to be my scientific attitude, I must
admit that your position is perfectly understandable."

"Me also." The second observer was visibly shaken. "Bid you see the
thing? I can barely allow that it may be intelligent."

"We have no absolute measure of that yet," Broh said thoughtfully. "It
is surely a member of the crew, but it may be a subordinate type. The
real masters of this vessel may be another, higher species that employs
the kind we saw for menial functions. Our ancestors had specialized
func­tions. Primitive Thranx workers were of superior intelligence
compared to ancient soldiers. We may simply have encoun­tered an alien
soldier, functional but comparatively mind­less."

"A plausible theory," the first observer admitted. "Or it may be a
member of a different, less advanced race. The relationship may hold
between two dissimilar species."

"Exactly. The one we've seen may have acted belliger­ently, but as yet
no one has been hurt." Broh turned to Anzeljermeit. "No one is to shoot
until I give the orders."

"Very well, sir." The officer was speaking rapidly into his suit
communicator, relaying via the shuttle the request for reinforcements.
He spent a moment listening, then spoke to the rest of the group. "Pilot
says that she has re­quests from Science for a more detailed description
of the alien being."

"In due time," Broh told him. "We'll provide visuals as well. And if we
can persuade or capture one, the depart­ment will have it to study in
person."

Again the officer relayed the message. "They say they're not sure
they're ready for personal inspection and study, sir."

"They'd best prepare themselves." Broh used his most authoritative tone.
"That is our task. As an exploration team we must deal with the ugly as
well as the beautiful. As to the request for a more detailed description
of the alien, you may relay our initial impressions."

"I don't know if the computer will settle for the simple declaration
that the alien ship is crewed by monsters," murmured the second observer.

"It will have to, for now," said the third. "Unscientific and emotional
the description may be, but it has the virtue of concision. It should
prepare the crew for actual contact."

They waited in the corridor, unconsciously edging to­ward the airlock,
their eyes working constantly lest the nightmare spring upon them again
before reinforcements could arrive from the /Zinramm/.


  Chapter Four

 

Fal turned up the volume on the teaching unit and nudged her current
charge. The bulky, mottled?white mass stirred listlessly in the cradle.
She spoke to it in a gently admonishing tone.

It was Learning Time, yet Vii was dozing off. That was not permissible.
Worse, it was not the first time. Tests re­vealed that Vii suffered from
a minor chemical imbalance that could be overcome through intensive
conditioning and without the use of drugs. Conditioning was safer, but
hard­er on the Nurses.

So Fal devoted more time to Vii than to the others. She held her
patience as she prodded the would?be sleeper back to wakefulness. While
she waited for any questions she thought again about the message she'd
received from her clan cousin Brohwelporvot.

It had been many years since she'd actually seen him, that day long ago
when he'd arrived in Paszex for her Emerging. He'd been introduced to
her newly adult form by the clanmother of the Sa. Though only related to
the Sa, the clan was still inordinately proud of him because of their
connection to the Por. Willow?wane was a colonial world and Paszex in
its most primitive region, so there was little for the town's clans to
boast about. Through connection with the Por clan of Hivehom they could
claim Brohwel­porvot as a relative, and he was no less than a starship
captain.

For some reason Broh had taken a special liking to the new adult, and
they corresponded intermittently over the years. Which made the most
recent communication all the more unusual. Normally Brohwelporvot was
the most prosaic and rational of correspondents. Yet his latest
com­munication was not only rambling but infused with emo­tional overtones.

The larva Vii broke into her thoughts with a question regarding the
information being displayed on the teaching screen. Fal strained to
understand the awkward larval words. Only a trained Nurse could easily
comprehend the soft?mouthed babble of the young.

       She answered the question and then responded to the larva's
request by once again turning down the volume of the machine. She
watched Vii carefully, but her insistence seemed to have finally
produced the desired result and the larva gave no sign of drifting back
to sleep.

Yes, a very strange communication, Fal mused. If she hadn't personally
known its source she would almost have thought it hysterical. She
considered reporting it to her clanmother. That would be a good idea,
she decided. Per­haps a wiser head could make better sense of it. It
could do no harm to seek another's opinion, even if Broh had in­structed
her not to mention the content of the communica­tion to anyone else. She
would tell Ryo also, of course. It was his right, and his own
intelligence might see to the heart of the garbled communication.

Idly she checked the monitors set into the upper duty strap of her vest.
Soon it would be bathing time. That was a chore she looked forward to;
washing the grubs down, knowing that their pasty white flesh would soon
give way to a jewel?like cocoon from which a new adult would even­tually
emerge fresh and glistening into the world. It gave Fal never?ending
delight that she and her associates in the Nursery helped to bring about
that miraculous transforma­tion.

After evening meal, when she and Ryo had settled down for a presleep of
learning, entertainment, and conversation, she moved to the apartment
console and ran the personal messages of the day. She slowed the one
from Broh.

"Isn't it the most peculiar thing you've ever seen?" she asked him as
the communication crawled slowly up the screen. "So emotional and so
disjointed. It's not like him at all, Ryo"

But her mate hardly heard her. At first he'd concealed his boredom by
listening politely to her concerns as they'd watched the message
unravel. Lines and angles formed words before him.

As the tone and content of the communication emerged, however, something
pierced him like a surgical probe. He raised his head off the saddle
cushion and stared fixedly at the screen. Fal he barely heard.

When it was over there was a buzz and a light flashed to the left of the
screen. Ryo immediately left his saddle and walked up to adjust the
controls. The communication re­played, still slower this time.

"You see what I mean, then," she said, when the repeat had concluded and
the screen displayed daily news. She leaned to the right and let her
legs touch the floor.

"Yes." Ryo's reply sounded thinly, as if he were trying to whistle
through his spicules instead of his mandibles. That was a trick some
Thranx could manage, but he didn't seem to be doing it intentionally.

"Well, what do you think of it?"

"Think of it." He turned to face her. His fingers were twisting in
instinctive patterns indicative of great excite­ment. "It's simply the
most marvelous thing that's ever happened!"

That was not at all the reaction she'd expected from Ryo, though if
she'd thought more deeply about it she might not have been so surprised.
In fact, she might not have men­tioned Brohwelporvot's message at all.

"It means we've found a completely new, completely al­ien space?going
intelligence!"

"A race of monsters, according to Broh." Fal was put off* *by the
strength and direction of his response.

"Initial impressions count for nothing. I have to see them for myself,
of course."

"That's an amusing thought."

"I am very serious," Ryo replied, adding an unmistak­able gesture of
fifth?degree assertiveness.

"I don't believe you. Why fill with dirt the burrow so laboriously
excavated? You make less sense than that communication."

Because something inside me says that I have to do this, he thought. It
all tied in somehow with what he thought he'd been missing all these
years. The message of a frantic, distant relative had fanned the hidden
ember into a forest blaze. Now it was too late to put it out.

Fal was rambling, her voice and gestures full of bewil­derment. "No
sense, no sense. It's not your place to do something like this. You
cannot. What of your assignment, your work?"

"It can be done by others."

"That's not what I mean. You're about to be promoted to Company council.
The hive thinks well of you? And what of us? You have other
responsibilities." She slid off the lounge and firmly entwined antennae
with him. "You have other responsibilities." She caressed him warmly.

He tried to think of a better way to put it, could not. "It's a thing I
have to do, Fal."

"But you don't say why. Can't you explain?"

"No better than I already have."

She let loose his antennae, backed away. "I can't accept decision
without reason. You must not do this. I will not permit it."

But Ryo was already moving through the apartment, slipping on day vest
and pouch, stocking items in his cloth­ing. "I'll contact you as soon as
I'm able. I am sorry, Fal. There's nothing else I can do."

"There is. Nothing is forcing you to do this." She spaced each click and
whistle deliberately.

"I'll contact you as soon as I can," he said again. Then he was out the
exitway and into the cool night corridor beyond.

Fal stood in the center of the front room, stunned. It had happened so
fast: he'd read the message, there'd been some excitement, a little
talk, and then he was gone. On the way to far Hivehom and perhaps also
to insanity. She was too fond of him to allow it. There was too much to
throw away. She walked rapidly to the console.

The Servitors met him halfway to the transport terminal, holding
themselves a little more stiffly than was normal. They were not
dispensing aid to the aged or collecting gar­bage now.

"Good evening," Ryo said, executing a hasty gesture of greeting.

"Good eve to you, citizen," said the leader of the group. There were
four of them, all bigger than Ryo. Soldier throwbacks, he thought. He
tried to step around 'them. They shifted to block his way.

"Is something the matter?" he inquired of the leader.

"Perhaps. Perhaps not. We act on a request from your clanmother and family."

"I don't understand," he said as they turned him bodily about, a
foothand on each of his own. "I've committed no crime. What does this mean?"

"We are not certain ourselves," the leader told him. "Only that our
action has been sanctioned by the hive­mother as well. I am sorry," he
added apologetically, and seemed to mean it. "You are aware of the
customs. Such a request must be carried out."

Request. Ryo turned the word over bitterly in his thoughts as he stood
in the clan meeting hall. It was very late. The four Servitors had
departed, still apologizing.

Seated before him were at least a dozen Ryo recognized. Fal was there
... that surprised him, though it shouldn't have. His sire and dame. Two
of his three sisters ... the other had moved away to Zirenba. Several
clan elders.

"My free movement as a citizen has been interfered with," he said. His
gaze settled on Fal. She looked away from him, nervously cleaning one
eye with a damp truhand.

"I am sorry, Ryo. I thought this necessary, best for you as well as me.
You have your responsibilities."

"We're not mated," he said, more bluntly than he in­tended. She ceased
her cleaning.

"I am aware of that. What I have done was done out of my feelings for
you, whatever you may feel for me. You must believe that." Her whistle
was painfully plaintive.

"Come here, Ryozenzuzex." It was a command, but a gentle one. He stepped
forward until he was standing be­fore a Thranx he'd met only twice before.

Twenty?five hundred members of the Zu clan lived in Paszex, and
Ilvenzuteck was their spiritual if not legal head. The clanmother was
very old. Her chiton had faded to deep purple, was nearly black in
places. Her antennae drooped and her eyes were dull as death, but there
was nothing corpselike about her speech. Her gestures were minimal but
lucid, her whistles properly pitched, the clicks sharp and devoid of any
suggestion of uncertainty.

"Falmiensazex has told me of your desire to leave us. Indeed, to leave
Paszex and Willow?wane to fly off to Hive­hom on some bizarre quest."

Ryo glanced toward Fal, who was not looking at him. "Did she tell you
that my reasons involve more than merely a crazed desire?"

"She did not elaborate. She merely said that it had to do with a desire
that you felt required satisfaction but could not describe in detail."

"That much is true enough," he admitted.

"Such feelings can be treated."

"Physically I'm fine, Clanmother. Mentally I've always been slightly
different." He noticed his sire making small, half?unconscious gestures
of sad affirmation. "But never aberrant enough to warrant treatment. My
personal achievements and successes speak to that." He did not need to
point out the shining star set in his shoulder. Ilvenzuteck had
witnessed its setting.

"They do indeed," she said. "If they did not, we might be holding this
conversation under more difficult circum­stances. But this has nothing
to do with eccentricity or any desire of yours. You have
responsibilities here: to the In­mot Company, to your hive, to your
family, and," she added with a gesture, "to Falmiensazex. To your
family?to ­be. Many ancestors are sitting in this chamber with us. They
fill the empty saddles and sit in judgment. You can­not abandon them,
too. We all have our secret desires, our secret wishes. Unfortunately,
the universe is not? so con­structed that we may be permitted to fulfill
them."

“I'm sorry, but?“

She interrupted him, as was her privilege. "You must not pursue this
thing. It drives you toward destruction. I will not let you throw away
so promising a life, Ryozenzuzex. As your clanmotber, I forbid it. That
holds no legal power, as you are aware. But if you hold to your heritage
at all, such abstracts will not tempt you."

"And if I try to go anyway, `heritage' notwithstanding?"

"I have registered my decision with the hive council. Hivemother
Tal?i?zex concurs. So do your parents and your premate. So will your
employers. Many witnesses to this conversation will testify to your
oddness of habit. They will do so to protect you from yourself, out of
love for you."

Ryo calmly studied the assembled faces and bodies and saw this to be so.
He would have expected nothing else.

"It is your future happiness they hold dear. As I do," Evenzuteck said
gently.

"I do not doubt that," he replied, truthfully enough.

"If you try to leave," she continued softly, "your clan­mates will stop
you. If you get past them, the hive council will have you recalled,
citing your importance to the wel­fare of the hive.

"You have done well on the scale of this hive, slightly in terms of
Willow?wane itself, and not at all in terms of interplanetary society.
Speaking practically, you could not reach Hivehom. You have not the
resources. Your credit is locked in mutual file with your premate
Falmiensazex, and a limit node has been placed upon it."

He threw Fal a sharp look.

"For the same reasons, Ryo," Fal told him. "If our posi­tions were
reversed, you would do the same for me. I've worked for that credit as
hard and as long as you. You've not the right to do whimsy with it."

"Let me have my share then." His tone was coaxing, affectionate.

"No. When this attack fades from your mind and you are your rational
self once more, you will be grateful for what all your friends have done
for you. You have many friends, Ryo."

"It does not matter," Ilvenzuteck said. "Even if you had access to all
the credit it would not be nearly enough to carry you to Hivehom. You
have no concept of the costs of the greater society. Your Learning Time
did not include that."

"I'd get there. One way or the other, I'd get there."

"Is that truly your wish, or only what you think you wish?" she
continued shrewdly. "You've listened to me. You've seen the reaction of
all who love you most. Is it not possible they are right and you are
wrong? Against experi­ence, tradition, and love you can marshal only a
vague `de­sire.' Who then musters the better argument, Ryozenzuzex? You
are intelligent. Use that intelligence now and speak truthfully with
your inner self."

He seemed to slump, his body to droop between his legs. "I cannot fight
your arguments, Clanmother. I suppose you are right. You are all right."
He did not sound pleased, but the intensity had left him. "It was the
excitement of the moment, the possibilities I saw. But I see now that
they are not for me. Foolishness. I am ashamed."

He executed a gesture of embarrassment mixed with mild humor. "When
inspected dispassionately from outside, it does indeed appear irrational
and immature."

"There's no need to feel embarrassed," his sire said. "You are admired
for your confession to reality. If your curiosity is so great, perhaps
you should have chosen infor­mation processing for a career."

"Not a bad thought. Maybe someday I still could, as a second profession."

"Perhaps," Ilvenzuteck said soothingly. She was watch­ing him closely.
"How do you feel?"

"Not too well," he said. "Tired."

"Understandable. Enough of this silliness, now. Go back to your
admirable apartment with your premate."

"If you want to, that is, Ryo." Fal was worried.

"Of course I want to." He looked around gratefully. "I thank you, thank
you all, for what you've done. For your concern and your affection. I've
been an idiot, and not for the first time. But for the last."

Fal approached him and they entwined antennae lov­ingly.

"That's much better." Ilvenzuteck sighed in relief. "A night best
forgotten. We've all been roused from a sound sleep and all must work
tomorrow. So, everyone to home, and let it be the last said of this matter."

Days passed. Unexpectedly a second message arrived from Brohwelporvot.
Fal didn't hesitate to show it to Ryo. The wording and phrasing were
calm, controlled, wholly typical of Broh as opposed to the previous
hysterical and life?disrupting communication.

Broh's message explained that everything in the previous communication
was the result of overwork and overworry and the pressures of a
difficult command in which he did not yet feel comfortable. No monsters
existed, no contact had been made with a spherical black alien craft,
and he, Broh, had been dispatched to a rest facility for a vacation. He
was feeling quite chipper, and she should not worry. Someday he would
explain in more detail about the night­mares that could afflict one in
Deep Space, and they would both have a fine long?range laugh over it.

Fal replayed the message a second time for Ryo. He ab­sorbed it and
immediately agreed that it explained sensibly everything that had gone
before. It was not even necessary to repeat it at a slower speed because
he'd arrived at a similiar conclusion about the first message on his
own. It was good to have his theory confirmed.

Clearly Broh had dictated the message himself, for his own face was
imprinted on the bottom of the communica­tion. And to allay any possible
lingering suspicion on Ryo's part, Fal had confirmed the message's
authenticity via a brief, terribly expensive personal voice?picture
conversation with Broh himself, on Hivehom, a copy of which
conver­sation she played for Ryo.

The whole incident had been a fantasy that had been precipitated by a
bad dream. No longer would it cloud their lives. Ryo was quite in
agreement, even chiding her for having to show the recording to him. The
first communica­tion had not so much as tickled his thoughts since the
meeting in the clan hall.

Now he had to rest, for tomorrow would be a difficult day in the jungle.
There was tiresome clearing to supervise, and would she please stop
troubling him with such triviali­ties?

But during sleeptime he lay conscious and awake, his thoughts churning
like a tropical storm. Something had forced Brohwelporvot to compose and
transmit the second communication. Something or someone had decided to
cover matters with the one person, however indifferent, who'd been
informed of things she ought not to know.

 

Half a season passed. The incident seemed completely forgotten. Life was
easy and smooth with him and Fal. The discreet surveillance the hive
council had set on Ryo was gradually withdrawn.

He received the expected promotion to the local Inmot council and
in?field supervison of clearing and planting passed to another. The
bexamin vines throve, increasing still further his stature within the
Company and the hive.

So when word came through Company channels that Ryo was required in
Company council in Ciccikalk he showed no surprise and certainly no
excitement over what was just a boring business trip to the capital. He
made no unusual preparations for the trip and was normal in voicing his
dismay at having to travel so far from home and hive. Only he knew as he
sped southward that he would not be returning to Paszex very soon.

His otherwise empty eight?person module traveled fast and silent. The
first night an unexpected bump jolted him awake, but it was only the
sound of another module linking to his own. A few passengers boarded at
the next stop. They took no notice of him. His anonymity would be
pre­served until he failed to appear at the Company council meeting.
Then communications would pass querulously be­tween Ciccikalk and
Paszex. With luck it would be some time before his disappearance was
linked to a possible re­currence of his youthful mental aberrations.

The module train curved southwestward, gradually turn­ing and
accelerating due south. In time it crossed into more heavily populated
country, and after four days the train began to slow.

For half a day Ryo watched as roads, ventilators, and surface facilities
began to appear like growths on the land. His module was in hill country
and still slowing when the train finally pulled into the transport
center of Zirenba, where he changed for Ciccikalk. Seven additional days
of steady southerly travel revealed vast panoramas of culti­vated fields
that put those of Paszex to shame. Huge black ventilator stacks hinted
at great subterranean manufactur­ing complexes.

And finally it was night again and the long train of crowded modules was
pulling into the central passenger terminal at Ciccikalk. As each module
halted the doors au­tomatically sprang open. The simple portion of his
journey was at an end. From now on he would have to move as a fugitive.

Ciccikalk was a metropolis of nearly three million, home to 20 percent
of the planet's population. The central termi­nal was only one of a
dozen of similar size that ringed the city's boundaries, and was as
large as Paszex.

Ryo had expected great size, but not confusion. No sta­tistic can convey
the feel and scope of a large city to some­one from a small town.

Overhead, myriad signs flashed showing modules and their destinations or
those arriving from outlying com­munities and towns. The terminal was
filled with Thranx pressing tight upon one another as they made their
way to treks and exits.

Ryo found himself fighting for control. To one side, he saw a line of
rest saddles, forced his way through the crowd to them, and settled
gratefully into one. Now he could watch and study the teeming terminal
without having to fight for a place to stand.

He tried to remember what he'd learned about Ciccikalk. Three million
was the metropolitan population. There were several million more living
and working in the peripheral cities and towns. As opposed to Paszex's
five levels, there were forty?three beneath him here, wrenched from the
rock of the planet. In addition to this prodigious feat of excava­tion,
a dozen upper levels had been cut into the hills that ringed the Cicci
Valley, and that was the hardest fact to grasp; that there were more
than twice as many levels here /above /the surface as there were in all
of Paszex.

Though still dazed he tried to review his somewhat sketchy plan of
action. The fare to the capital had cost him all but his last
unmonitored chit. He had exactly eight cred­its left. That would not buy
him the right to look at a shuttlecraft, much less passage on a
posigravity transport. It might keep him alive for a month. That did not
take into account the problem of lodgings. He could not touch his joint
account with Fal.

He would have to ration himself very closely. Perhaps he might find
sleeping quarters in the poorer sections of the city. When to eat was
not a concern. Nothing ever closed completely in a city the size of the
capital. This was not sleepy Paszex.

The lack of credit to buy time did not worry him, since he doubted he
would have a month. Eventually his image would be circulated and connect
with the observation of some Ciccikalk Servitor and he would be picked
up. He would have to use his credit stick to purchase passage on a ship.
With luck, by the time the transaction was registered and the
authorities were alerted, he would be on a ship making the break into
Space Plus.

If he took a vessel's last shuttle prior to departure, and if that
shuttle docked just before its ship departed Willow-­wane orbit, he
might get away before the Servitors could freeze the ship. Once away
from Willow?wane, he was con­fident he could find some way to reach the
surface of Hive­hom undetected, even if the Willow?wane authorities
mes­saged ahead via Nullspace communications.

First Ryo had to find a place to stay while he studied the transport
manifests for the most suitable departing ship. He also wanted a meal.
The internal city transport mod­ule he entered was designed to assist
travelers and was full of helpful information, though its attitude
became slightly reproachful when Ryo indicated he wished to stay at the
cheapest hotel possible.

Noise and some of the confusion faded as the vehicle slipped out of the
frenetic transport terminal. Ryo relaxed a little. The burrow corridors
narrowed as the module de­scended. It eventually went horizontal at the
Thirty?third Level, turned eastward, then north, and finally deposited
him at Level 33, Subannex 1,345.

At that point the corridor was just wide enough for two transports to
pass each other and the ceiling hung barely a meter above Ryo's
antennae, but he felt right at home in the comfortable claustrophobic
surroundings.

Nearby was the entrance to Dulinsul, the establishment that the module
had reluctantly recommended. A number of simply dressed Thranx were at
the saddles inside, con­versing, drinking, or eating the evening meal.
Ryo selected a booth near the back, placing his order through the tiny
speaker set into the table surface, and stretched out on the hard,
unpadded saddle. A dour elderly Thranx with one antenna eventually
delivered the food by hand.

A single curved spout emerged from the prosaic drinking tankard. No
intricate scrollwork here, Ryo mused. The tray that came with it held
steamed vegetables, two different tuber pastes, a long section of Higrig
fruit, and the requi­site bowl of soup. The meat in the soup was tough
but fla­vorful and the rest adequate. Ryo consumed all the food as if he
were sitting in the finest gourmet restaurant in the city. He'd made it
safely to Ciccikalk. Success was all the spice he needed.

"The way you're inhaling that food, I'd say you're pretty hungry."

He looked up. Standing next to him was a diminutive adult. Female. Her
face and wing cases were adorned with garish ornamentation; paste jewels
and bright sequins that were simply glued on instead of being properly
inlaid. From her body vest and neck pouch metal tinsel hung nearly to
the floor. Strands of imitation gold filigree hung loosely from her
ovipositors.

"Travel always makes me hungry," he replied, turning to his food. He
took a long suck from the spout of the tan­kard.

She eyed it curiously. "What are you having?"

"Quianqua fruit juice," he said apologetically, and then wondered why
he'd used the apologetic inflection.

"Piss juice, you mean." The female turned, gestured to­ward the front
counter. Without being asked, she settled into the saddle opposite Ryo.
Light flashed from her om­matidia. The thin gold bands that crossed the
center of the eye were wider than most. "You don't look like the
assembly?line type."

"I'm not," he admitted. "I'm a raw land surveyor and have been working
to the north."

"Out of the hive, then?"

"Yes. I'm here on exploration?related business and trying to husband my
credits." She seemed to be enjoying the con­versation. As was he. It was
relaxing to have someone to talk to he could feel safe with. She did not
strike him as a Servitor operative.

His descriptions of the jungle and wild lands to the north fascinated
her. By her own admission she'd never been out­side Ciccikalk. A common
condition of large?hive citizens, Ryo mused. It limits their horizons.

The kitchen worker arrived with two tankards of some­thing that smelled
wonderful. The drinking spouts were slightly more elaborate than that of
the tankard he'd started with, each having a single neat spiral worked
into it. They were what passed for fancy utensils in the Dulin­sul.

"I think you'll like this," she said, taking a deep suck from her own spout.

The drink lightened his thoughts and lifted his worries. The sensation
was not unlike being tossed by the Southern Jhe, though the fear of
drowning was absent.

"You're right, it's marvelous. What is it?"

"Masengail wine. I'm glad you like it, since you're pay­ing for it."

"I am?"

"I introduced you to it. Isn't that enough?" Again the trilling laugh.

"Fair enough." He sipped more deeply. It made him feel lovely.


  Chapter Five

 

He'd been wrong about many things in his life, but never so wrong as
he'd been about the wine. It had lightened his thoughts and lifted his
worries, and while it couldn't drown him like the Southern Jhe, it did
help him bash his head against something. Or bash something against it.

He leaned against the wall and gingerly felt of his head with a
foothand. The chiton was not cracked, for which he was grateful.
However, his head did feel as if someone had unscrewed it from his
b?thorax and then replaced it back­ward and upside down. Improper
orientation seemed to af­flict the street too, though the longer he
stared at it the more it seemed to right itself. But the pain
intensified as the view solidified.

He took a couple of steps and nearly toppled over. Even­tually he
succeeded in reaching a corridor corner where the standard direction
plate was imbedded in the wall. He read it several times before he could
understand it.

It informed him that he was on Level 40, Subannex 892. Vaguely it
occurred to him that he was not where he ought to be. Squatting down on
the street, he tried to order his thoughts.

Slow inspection revealed that in addition to the lightness between his
eyes, his body had been lightened in several other places. His single
remaining credit chit was gone, along with his pouch tools and anything
else of value. Gone were identification, personal effects, and the
credit stick that he now would not have to worry about alerting
Servi­tors with. He'd been left his vest and pouch, and that was all.

Patiently he reconstructed the far?away?and?long?ago events that had
left him on an unknown burrow corridor with an aching skull. There had
been the Masengail wine and the lovely stranger. Teah, her name had
been. She never had given him her full name. Conversation and more wine.
A lot more wine, and then the suggestion that since he had no place to
stay that night he spend it with her. There were implications of
nonprocreative sex.

A walk through some unusually dark and ill?maintained streets, then
darkness descended. The dim feeling of being moved. Waking up dazed, in
pain, and on his side on the left?hand corner of burrow street marker
Level 40, Suban­nex 892.

I've been robbed, he thought hysterically, and started to laugh, his
whistling filling the narrow corridor, bouncing off nearby walls. Our
carefully planned, wonderful society, every Thranx knowing his or her
place and obligations, laws firmly laid down and adhered to, led to this.

He wondered what old Ilvenzuteck, so steeped in tradi­tion and custom,
would have thought of the situation. Such a thing could never have
occurred in the isolated, neat little hive of Paszex. The old wreck
would probably faint from shock. Inside him a small sane fragment of
self was aghast at the insult he'd just composed. His own sisters and
family would have shunned him had he said it in their presence.

Amazing how reaching part of your goal only to be re­lieved of the rest
of your dream as well as your possessions and nearly your life can
enlighten you as to the true nature of the world, he thought wildly. He
continued to laugh.

A couple of Thranx coming home from late?night work passed him on the
other side of the corridor, keeping their eyes averted. He yelled and
screamed at them and they scuttled a little faster.

The laughter faded, the ill?modulated whistling died out. He was alone
on the dimly lit corridor between two silent shopfronts.

For two days he wandered aimlessly through the hive. Without planning
it, he eventually found himself back in the central transport terminal.

If nothing else, he thought dully, he could charge a com­munication back
to Paszex. He suspected his family would reaccept him and hoped that
possibly F'al might as well. The dream that had driven him to Ciccikalk,
that had pushed him so far, had faded to a persistent ache centered
somewhere along the back of his neck, where the robbers had struck him.

He no longer bothered with his appearance. The reaction of other
citizens to his presence was evidence that he'd become something less
than presentable. He'd had nothing to eat for two days, but water was
available from public fountains. His stomach contorted inside his
abdomen, and he was growing faint from hunger.

I won't make that communication, he thought weakly. I won't admit defeat
and return home. I'll die in Ciccikalk first. Better a fool dead trying
than a living failure. Yet he retained enough sense to realize how
foolish that declara­tion sounded. If something did not happen very soon
he knew he would send that communication. He would aban­don the
absurdity that had bothered him since Learning Time, and return placidly
to his proper home and work.

The Thranx in front of him was exceedingly well dressed. His body vest
and neck pouch were woven of rich but unostentatious imported fabrics.
His chiton was just turning from blue?green to violet. The inlays on his
upper and lower abdomen were alternating insets of blue and sil­ver
metal arranged in simple patterns. Everything about his posture and
attire bespoke intelligence, breeding, and wealth.

There was a slight bulge in the elder's neck pouch. Prob­ably carries a
fat packet of credit chits in there, Ryo thought coldly. A nice, heavy
roll of eighty?credit pieces that he can boast about to the less
fortunate. The elder's credit stick would be useless to Ryo, of course,
but the loose chits might be enough to buy him a one?way passage to Hivehom.

But how? He couldn't beg an eighth fraction of a chit here in a public
facility and certainly not eight hundred. Talk to him, quick, before he
goes on his way, came the sudden crazy thought! Ask him for directions,
for sympa­thy, ask anything so long as it will get him over here. No,
over there, behind that great pillar, out of sight.

A quick blow to the neck just beneath the skull, enough to knock him out
and if you break his b?thorax, so what? Parading about the terminal as
if he owned it! Does he have any dreams? Doubtful, that. Probably
inherited his wealth from the maximum bequest allowed by law. Doesn't
deserve it anyway, has no real use for it. Unlike those of us who still
have the courage to dream, even if such dreams are unhealthy and
involuntary because they drive us, com­pel us, force us?

"Excuse me, sir," he found himself saying politely, "I wonder if I might
talk with you a moment?"

"Most certainly, friend." The voice was perfectly modu­lated, an
imperceptible blend of whistles, clicks, and syllables. A voice
accustomed to conversing in High, not Low, Thranx. Not like us simple
country folk, thought Ryo.

"I'm new in the hive."

"I can tell that," the elder said sympathetically.

I'll bet you can, Ryo thought grimly. In a few moments you'll be spared
the necessity of thinking.

"Just over here, sir, if you would be that kind. I have my map there."
He pointed to the huge pillar. Around them modules whined and people
talked loudly, intent on their own business. It would only take a
second, just a second, and no one would notice. "It's with my luggage."

"I'd be happy to assist you, youth." The elder dipped antennae politely.
"Let's have a look at your map."

They were very close to the pillar now. "That's odd," observed the
elder, peering in apparent confusion at the floor. "Where did you say
your luggage was?"

"Just there," Ryo told him encouragingly, "just back in the shadows."

Desperately he tried to swing the ready foothand at the elder's neck,
but his quarry was far away now, far away on the other side of the
jungle, across the raging Southern Jhe, looking back at him curiously
and making sad sounds as he faded into the distance.

Then someone threw the terminal floor at him. Very un­fair, he thought,
damnably unfair to throw an entire floor at a drowning soul. The floor
pressed him down, down into the depths of the thundering, roiling river ...

 

The one thing he would not have expected to feel on a return to
consciousness was sunshine. It warmed his eyes and forced him to turn
away from its brilliance. He was suddenly sick, but there was nothing in
his gut for him to throw up.

A gentling voice said, "You slept an entire day and night. About time
you woke up."

Ryo sat up very slowly, rolling onto his side and raising his upper
torso. At once he became aware of several things that in combination
nearly overwhelmed him: an impres­sion of subdued wealth, morning
sunshine, and the wonder­ful, throat?rending aroma of freshly cooked food.

"I would ask if you're hungry, but the answer is clear from the moisture
at your mandibles."

Ryo searched for the source of the voice. Standing close on his right
was the old Thranx he'd encountered in the transport station. For an
instant Ryo froze. But the elder didn't seem at all concerned. Slightly
amused, if anything.

"Well, are you hungry or aren't you?" He turned away, his back presented
fearlessly to the figure on the lounge. "Of course if you're not I can
have it thrown?"

"No, no." Ryo scrambled off the sleep lounge. "I am hungry."

"Of course you are," the elder said pleasantly as he led Ryo into the
eating area.

It was beautifully appointed, with that same clear eye for good taste
that had been evident in the sleeping cham­ber. The central table was of
laminated hardwoods that were a rainbow of natural colors. The walls
were com­pacted natural earth, glue?bonded and inlaid with crosswise
metal strips to form an ocher and silver dome overhead. No natural light
penetrated here.

Ryo attacked the waiting banquet with utter lack of shame. His belly
screamed its needs at him and they would be satisfied at the expense of
etiquette. The elder looked on interestedly.

When his insides finally signaled /enough /and he leaned back in the
comfortable saddle, Ryo thought to study his host. Yes, he was the same
Thranx who'd nearly met an early end in the terminal. The inlays on his
abdomen were the same, as was that peculiar forward inclination of the
skull. At first Ryo had thought the cranial tilt an affecta­tion. Now he
saw that it was a permanent part of the el­der's physiognomy.

His stare was noted. "I broke my neck?oh, six or seven years ago," the
elder said pleasantly.

Embarrassed at having been caught, Ryo looked away.

"I was climbing a tree, if you must know," the elder finished.

Ryo was startled. Yaryinfs climbed trees. Muelnots, shrins, and ibzilons
climbed trees. Thranx did not. They were not built for it. Not their
legs or their truhands. Only the foothands were properly constructed for
such an effort, and you could not haul yourself up a woody trunk with
only two limbs.

"Why were you trying to climb a tree?"

The elder whistled softly. "Wanted to see what it was like from the top,
of course."

"But you could have been lowered into the treetop by a hoverer or raised
on a picker arm."

"You don't understand?but neither did anyone else. You see, I am a
poet." He stepped forward, touched anten­nae to Ryo's across the table.
"My name is Wuuzelansem."

"Ryozenzuzex," he replied automatically. He thought back to a bit of
recreational reading, or perhaps it was part of a conversation on
current aesthetics. "The /Eint /Wuuze­lansem?"

The elder executed a third?degree declamatory gesture. "I am the same."

"I have heard of you. More than that, I recall some of your poetry."

"Well, that's not necessarily a good thing." Wuuzelansem let out a
deprecatory chuckle. "Nevertheless, I suppose I am gratified. What is
your profession?"

Ryo immediately went on guard.

The poet noticed the reaction. "Oh, never mind. You needn't tell me if
you don't wish to. I know one thing. You're not a professional mugger."

Ryo was startled a second time.

"That was your intention in central station, was it not?"

After an instant's hesitation Ryo performed a gesture of embarrassed
agreement.

"Well, I suppose hunger can make one do anything."

?`How did you know I wasn't a mugger?"

"Because of the way you went about it." Wuu spoke matter?of?factly, as
if discussing the plumbing. "You see, I know many muggers and robbers.
They live in a state of perpetual danger and constant conflict. That can
provide the basis for some interesting poetry. I document in rhyme. I am
also fair with them, so many are my friends.

"The hive authorities frown on that relationship, of course. Such
individuals are not supposed to exist in the wondrous capital of
Ciccikalk." Whistling laughter rose from the experienced throat. "My
boy, the universe is full of things which are not supposed to exist but
continually confound us by doing so. Places in space where reality
dis­appears, suns that rotate not around one another but among dozens,
Nullspace where things that are too small to exist suddenly become real,
muggers and robbers?all difficult to believe in, all subjects for
poetical discourse.

"Now then," he settled himself into the saddle opposite Ryo, "since I've
hauled you back here and cared for you, you can at least be honest with
me. If I'd wanted to turn you over to the Servitors I could have done so
earlier, more safely, and at considerably less personal expense."

So Ryo told him, the whole story pouring out through his broken
confidence. When he'd finished, Wuu pondered silently for several
minutes. Then he led Ryo wordlessly from the eating area back into the
sleeping chamber. A wide pane of acrylic looked out of the side of the
hill. The sun was just below the horizon and rain clouds rose slightly
above it, their pink underbellies glowing as brightly as fac­eted kunzite.

"Alien monsters, hmm?" Wuu turned from the view to face Ryo. "It sounds
like a lot of garbage to me." Ryo said nothing. "Garbage strong enough
to drive you to leave your premate, your family, your clan, and your
hive, to make your way to a city like Ciccikalk. To some, I suppose,
gar­bage can become an obsession."

"It's not garbage," Ryo declared angrily. "It's part of a dream."

"Ah yes." Wuu sounded amused. "Very overrated, dreams. Nonetheless your
persistence and natural intelli­gence mark you as something more than a
mere fanatic. It strikes me you may have fallen into something worth
pursuing. It should be fun, anyway. What say that you and I make our way
to Hivehom and see if we can't find out?"

Ryo could not have been more startled had Fal suddenly rushed into the
room to throw herself wholeheartedly into the journey. Fal?he found
himself thinking of her fre­quently, but always the dream surged into
his brain, over­powering thoughts of anything else, goading him, guiding
him, inexorable in its demands, unrelenting in its mental pressure.

"Are you sure ... do you know what we may be get­ting into if my
suspicions turn out to have grounds, sir? There could be danger."

"I would hope so! Otherwise there would be no fun in this. If there were
no fun and danger, there'd be no poetry to it. And if there was no
poetry in it, there would be no reason for me to go. Now, would there?"

Ryo did not know how to answer that.

"Look, out there." The Eint turned and indicated the hillside window,
from which the view extended across the valley of the Cicci.

On the far left towered silver tubes that belched the scrubbed emissions
from immense manufacturing com­plexes. To the right were the intake
stacks that supplied fresh air to the millions swarming below. In the
distance, slightly to left of center, a tiny bright spot rose cloudward
at a speed too extreme and angle too sharp for it to be an aircraft.

"Yes, it's a shuttle. The port is that way." Wuu stood alongside Ryo,
contemplating the rising dot of light. "No telling where that one's
going, with its queen ship. To Hive­hom perhaps, or Amropolous or
another world. We could be on such a ship very soon, if you're agreeable."

Ryo said nothing, simply stared at the distant reflection until it
vanished into the cloud layer. When it was gone he turned to stare at
his benefactor, hardly daring to believe.

"It's not possible. You could follow the tale to its end, could return
and tell me about it. I cannot go with you. I have no access to credit."

Wuu executed a gesture not favored in polite society. "Credit is
nothing. I am showered with it for doing that which I would do for nothing."

"Well then, there is the matter of identification," Ryo continued
stubbornly. "Mine was taken. Even if it had not been, I'm not sure I
could reach a ship before the Servitors contacted it and had me held in
confinement. I must be listed in every computer terminal on the planet
by now."

"Then we must fashion a safe identity for you, my boy." Wuu considered
the problem, then explained, "I have been widowed twice. Both times
through unfortunate accidents. There are no natural offspring, but it
would surprise no one were I to announce that I had adopted several. You
can pose as my adopted offspring, which I suspect you are already, in
spirit if not legally.

"I told you that I know much of the underlife of Cicci­kalk. In addition
to those who prey upon the unwary I am also conversant with many engaged
in other forms of extralegal activity. Some of them are writers. Such
writing is never particularly inspiring, but their limited editions are
masterpieces. You will retain your personal name, which is common enough
not to arouse suspicion, I think. We will give you a new clan, family,
and hive. You will become Ryozeljadrec. How does that strike you?"

"Heavily enough to make me a candidate for a long stay in an adjustment
burrow, but if you really think it will be believed ..."

"Knowledge and money combined can work miracles, my boy. Alien monsters,
monstrous aliens?I feel a poem coming on already," and he rattled off a
string of singsong High Thranx whistle words, harmonically arranged and
lovely to hear.

"That's fine," Ryo said admiringly.

"Nothing, nothing. Garbage not worth setting to chip. Rough words, but
/we will /find inspiration worthy of publi­cation, my boy."

"I hope something good comes of all this. What if your?ah, forger proves
not as efficient as you seem to think he will?"

"I have a title, this `Eint.' It must /be /good for something. Surely it
will enable us to brazen our way past any uncertainty. Since you don't
have the experience for it, I shall do the brazening for us both. I do
it all the time. Is not poetry a method of brazening one's way past a
listener's defenses, in order to get directly at his emotions? Poetry's
more than harmonics and math, you know. We'll manage our way, don't worry.

"There is one thing. Have you given thought to your family and premate?"

Suddenly Ryo did not feel very well.

"Constantly," he murmured.

"That is as it should be. You struck me as a responsible* *young fellow.
We'll draft a communication to one of them. It will arrive in this
Paszex of yours by a most circuitous route so that its origin cannot be
traced. It will not go off at all until we are safely on our way and out
of the Willow-­wane system.

"It will not tell them your whereabouts or intentions, but that you are
well and thinking of them. If what you've told me so far is true, the
last thing they will believe is that you've succeeded in making your way
off?planet. It will be something of a shock to them when you return with
the truth, but until then they will at least not consider setting a
burial service for you."

Ryo watched the poet instead of the scene beyond the window. "You do
realize what you're doing?"

"What's that?" asked Wuu. He'd settled himself before a beautifully
inlaid computer console and was busily run­ning his fingers across the
square touchboard.

"You're breaking at least four laws on my behalf."

"Oh, laws." Wuu made a shockingly rude sound. "What do you think the
task of poets is if not to break laws?" Information rippled across the
console screen. "A transport departs from Hivehom in three days. I think
we can be ready by then, my boy."

"So soon? But don't you have things to prepare, affairs that need to be
tidied up before you can leave? We've no idea how long we'll be gone."

"My affairs always need tidying up," said Wuuzelan­sem, adding a
third?degree twinkle. "Ryo, there are three great excuses one can use in
life. To say that one is mad, drunk, or a poet. It makes amends for a
great many de­lightful outrages one can safely perpetrate upon society.

"As to the preparation of your new identification, admit­tedly that will
require something of a rush job on the part of the lady I have in mind,
but I believe she can manage. She is a true artist. Wait until you see
her work. She uses all four hands simultaneously with a flow nothing
short of erotic. A thing of beauty?as your eventual identification will
surely be. Beautiful and believable both.

"I will book passage for us on the transport. Not upper class, not
lower, but middle. We don't want to be pushed around as we might be in
lower and we don't want to at­tract the attention that upper would bring.

"We'll travel with the average this time 'round, in search of distinctly
unaverage discoveries, and if no alien monsters should be skulking about
on Hivehom?well, it's been a while since I've been off my home world.
While the local and familiar are soothing to the soul, the mind requires
somewhat more extensive stimulation. The journey itself will be
worthwhile. I take it you have never been to Hive­hom?"

"I've never been outside Paszex until my journey here."

"It will be something for you to see. A bucolic lad like yourself. Yes,
three days should be enough."

"I don't know what to say or how to thank you for this," said Ryo,
adding a little click and gesture of amusement, " `Father.' "

"Good. You're beginning to get into the spirit of subter­fuge. Treat me
with respect, call me always as you would a real adoptive sire. We will
surely gain acceptable verse from the drama."

Suitable attire was ordered for Ryo. In keeping with Wuu's intentions to
stay as inconspicuous as possible, the clothing was new but not fancy.
Those constraints aside, the vest and pouch were attractive and sturdy.

A day prior to their scheduled departure a secretive little Thranx
appeared at Wuuzelansem's entryway to hand­ deliver a tiny package. This
produced a remarkable brace of identification documents, including even
a credit charge stick. The latter was supposedly unforgeable, for the
finan­cial institutions of all Thranx worlds were extremely
security?conscious. Ryo would use it only in an emergency.

"I will handle all fiscal transactions," said Wuu. "No sense in tempting
fate. That stick will be the most difficult to pass, but it's important
that you at least be able to show one. No one travels intersystem
without a stick." He stud­ied the younger Thranx. "How do you like your
new cloth­ing?"

Ryo dropped to all sixes, rose again and twisted his up­per body, shook
his abdomen. The vest stayed securely in place.

"I hardly know what to say."

"One wordless and one overflowing with words. We'll complement each
other well." The poet made a gesture indicative of second?degree
amusement mixed with disavowal of sarcasm. "Tomorrow then, we take ship."

"And if there are problems?"

"We'll deal with them as they present themselves. Spon­taneity is one of
the joys of existence, my boy, especially if you prepare for it in
advance." He wagged a truhand at the younger male.

Ryo didn't sleep well that night as he dreamed unreas­suring dreams that
centered on a gigantic slobbering thing with a mouth full of crooked,
snaggly teeth, crimson fur all over its body, and a half?dozen
claw?fingered hands that groped anxiously after him. It wore its
skeleton inside, like the yaryinf, and it wanted to suck out his head.

He woke uneasily to the soft chimes of Wuu's house alarm.

They packed little, carrying only hand luggage. "We're not going to an
investiture ball," Wuu had pointed out, "and those who travel light
travel fast."

Exiting the level complex in which Wuu lived, they took a shaft lift
below surface and then a fourth?level transport to the nearest module
terminus, where they boarded a di­rect module to the shuttleport.

"I regret only one thing that has happened thus far," said Ryo in the
quiet of their private compartment.

"What's that?"

"That those who beat and robbed me should escape with­out punishment."

"Who says they suffer no punishment? I know what their lives are like.
They are miserable most of the time and at best a little of the simplest
pleasures may trickle down to them. They live in many ways worse than
our primitive ancestors who grubbed a bare existence from the earth, for
the advantages of modern society are denied them. Yet ignorant and
unhappy though they are, they must somehow live too."

Wuu made an all?encompassing gesture with all four hands. "The universe
is a jungle, my boy. You could spend all your life in Willow?wanes
wildest reaches fighting poi­sonous flora and carnivorous fauna, be
healthy and happy, and come to the Hive of Ciccikalk one day only to be
run over by a transport module. If you regard every place as being
dangerous and uncivilized you will find yourself much more relaxed in mind."

It was quiet in the module then. Ryo thought how very far from home he
was and how farther still he was about to go. Very far from family and
clan, and from Fal.

What would she make of the cryptic message he and Wuu had concocted and
sent her? Would she forget him altogether? Assume he was lost mentally?
He hoped she would simply sigh deeply and return to the Nursery in hope
of his reappearance. Then again, she might seek an­other premate.

A mental shake shattered the thoughts like little crystals. He was
pursuing a dream the way an addict pursues his next fix. All that
mattered now was getting safely off­planet.

His nervousness increased exponentially as they walked up the ramp to
the shuttle entrance.

"What if the identification fails?" he whispered to Wuuzelansem. "What
if? ..."

"Everything will be fine if you'll simply relax and look normal," was
the poet's response. "Your antennae are so stiff they're going to crack.
Straighten your posture, incline your thorax properly, and act like
you're bored by the whole procedure, offspring."

"Yes ... sire."

There was a pause while their names were checked against the passenger
manifest. A line of Thranx waited to ascend the ramp. A single official
stood there, looking in­different as the machinery monitored both
manifest and personal identification.

He didn't even look up as Ryo and Wuu passed through and announced
themselves. Their ident slips were pro­cessed, checked, and efficiently
spat back at them by the boarding console.

Wuu appeared slightly miffed as they continued up the boarding ramp into
the shuttle. He hadn't been recognized.

"Not a reader or listener," he grumbled, referring to the official who'd
passed them through. "Civilization is really run by unaesthetic
illiterates."

"Is there then such a thing as an aesthetic illiterate?"

They launched into a discussion so animated and intense that Ryo almost
didn't notice when the shuttle's jets hissed and the thick?bodied craft
lifted into the air.

Airborne, Ryo thought in disbelief. Actually airborne. Like a hesornic.
Like a dream.

They quickly rose above the clouds. Only a dim red line marked the
horizon where the sun of Willow?wane was trying to hide. Airborne! What
must it have been like, he wondered, for his distant ancestors whose
wings had been, for the mating season at least, functional instead of
vestigial? Was intelligence such a good trade?off for the mo­mentary
power of flight?

Before long rockets took over from the starving jets. The shuttle was
now above the highest clouds, and the sky was fading from blue to
purple, aging much like a Thranx. Many songs had employed the analogy.
Then they were swimming through the long night and the stars were
bright­er than they'd ever been.

A scream rose from behind Ryo, down the central aisle. A female had
tumbled from her saddle and lay on her back, kicking at the air with all
four legs, pawing at it with her hands.

Two attendants rushed to her. One clamped a breathing pack over her
thorax and administered air from a tank while the other injected a drug
directly down her throat.

She quieted down immediately. Ryo glanced around and noticed that of the
two dozen or so passengers on the shut­tle, perhaps a fourth of them
wore glazed looks and sat in their saddles as if in a trance. He'd been
too absorbed by the view outside to notice it earlier. Now he looked
ques­tioningly at Wuu.

"The lady in distress experienced a severe attack of Out­side. It
particularly affects hive dwellers who spend most of their lives
underground. An ancestral carryover that some of the race is still heir
to, when we dwelt almost ex­clusively below ground and when to venture
outside was to expose oneself to the prowling carnivores that then
roamed the whole surface of Hivehom. This is ,probably her first flight
and she suppressed the feeling as long as she could."

"What about those?" Ryo indicated the strangely sub­dued passengers.

"The same problem, but those are experienced travelers. Certain drugs
safely counteract the Outside. The side ef­fects are minimal but
obvious. He turned to inspect Ryo.

"You feel no fear, no sense of panic?"

"Not a thing."

"Have you looked out the port?"

"I've been doing little else.

Wuu made a gesture of third?degree confidence mixed with mild curiosity.
"Most Thranx on a first extra atmos­pheric journey experience a certain
amount of mental dis­comfort. After repeated travel the discomfort
passes. Some, of course, feel nothing. They are the exception rather
than the rule. As I mentioned, I've done considerable traveling and
therefore feel nothing at all. As for yourself, I should not be
surprised that you are the exception in this way as well as in others."

"Open spaces have never bothered me," Ryo explained. "That was one of
the things, I think, that helped me to advance so rapidly in my profession."

"Ah yes, the exploiter of new agricultural land. You put food on my
table, so I won't start in on the morality of butchering Willow?wanes
native jungle simply to plant asfi."

It developed that Ryo was not quite as immune to the vagaries of Deep
Space travel as he first thought. When the ship passed beyond the last
of the system's six planets and shifted into Space Plus he fell prey to
the same nausea as everyone else, experienced or otherwise.

The stars became streaks and their colors changed as if they were being
viewed through a shaded prism. Once the nausea passed there was ample
time to enjoy the luxuries of middle?class shipboard life.

Days and nights fled apace, with the only indication of movement coming
from the slowly changing starfield.

Eventually the passengers had to return to their cabins a last time. The
ship dropped from Space Plus into normal space, stomachs were wrenched,
and the stars resumed their normal colors and positions and shapes.

Ahead lay a bright and somehow familiar sun. There were twelve planets
in the Hivehom system, the home world fully inhabited, of course, and
three others less so. Several timeparts passed and then they were in
orbit around Hivehom. The home world of the Thranx. The spawning place.
The where?we?all?come?from.


  Chapter Six

 

As the shuttle descended Ryo stared avid­ly out the long port. Hivehom
was a beau­tiful world. Not so beautiful as Willow-­wane perhaps, but
then his own home was a paradise.

Hivehom had 20 percent more surface area than Willow-wane, but only a
little more habitable territory because it was a cooler world. As they
dropped lower Ryo could make out white smears at the northern pole?solid
water, he knew from his studies. It was hard to imagine a place where,
there was little vegetation, where the air was cold and yet so dry that
your breath seemed to crackle in your lungs.

Then the shuttle fell too low to see that far north and there was only
green, green and brown like on Willow-­wane. Air began to scrape the
little craft and it skipped nimbly through the atmosphere as they
dropped through the rain clouds above Daret, the capital city of the Thranx.

Fifty?five million citizens claimed the Hive Daret as their home. The
capital city extended hundreds of kilome­ters in all directions, plunged
two hundred and fifty levels toward the center of the planet. Low hills
flanked the val­ley beneath which the city had been cut. A great river,
the Moregeeon, meandered over the metropolis. Long barges plied its
surface and for forty levels beneath its rocky bot­tom an intricate
complex of artificial aquifiers soaked up water to slake the city's
enormous thirst.

Air intakes rose a half?kilometer into the damp sky. They vibrated
slightly from the drag of immense suction pumps pulling air down to the
lowest levels. The forests of intakes and ventilators resembled a city
of windowless sil­ver towers.

Six shuttleports ringed the valley of the Moregeeon, the smallest
dwarfing the shuttleport serving Willow?wanes capital of Ciccikalk. The
shuttle banked sharply to avoid a cluster of cloud?spearing ventilators.

Wuuzelansem pointed out the port as they leveled off slightly in
preparation for landing. There, to the northwest, shone sunlight on the
towers of Chitteranx, a satellite city of six million particularly
wealthy Thranx. Still farther north lay the important metropolitan
complex known col­lectively as Averick, famed for incredibly ancient
temples raised by some pre?Thranx intelligence. Both lay hard by the
base of the vast frigid plateau that loomed like an island in Hivehom's
sea of clouds and was rarely, even at this modern date, visited or explored.

Daret itself was close to Hivehom's equator. Its surface boasted a mean
temperature of 33° C and average humid­ity ranging from 90 to 95
percent. With such ideal climatic conditions it was no wonder the valley
of the Moregeeon bad become the center of Thranx civilization.

The little craft leveled off and soon bumped slightly as its landing
gear contacted pavement. They were down and taxiing toward a dock. Ryo
tried to count the shuttles, lighter?than?air transports, and sleek
aircraft as they eased toward disembarkation, but soon lost track of
types and numbers.

The wonders of Hivehom from the air had fully occu­pied his attention
during the descent. Now that he and Wuu were on the ground, his early
worries returned. Slipping into Daret was likely to prove more difficult
then leaving Ciccikalk had been.

As usual, he was buoyed by Wuu's bottomless supply of optimism. "Worlds
may differ but bureaucrats are every­where the same. Do you recall our
departure from Cicci­kalk? Did that Servitospector linger over your new
identifi­cation?"

"I don't believe he ever looked at it," Ryo admitted. "He left
everything to the computer. But shouldn't it be differ­ent here? Not
only is this the mother world, but taking things out is not dangerous.
Bringing things into another world can be."

"I don't think we'll have any difficulty." The debarking tube and ramp
were rising from the ground toward the shuttle. No other structures
marred the smooth surface of the shuttleport.

"We've come direct from Willow?wane, a known world. We're not carrying
produce or sample material; in any case, there are few restrictions on
what can be brought in."

Those few restrictions were enough to inspire a very thorough customs
inspection, however. While Ryo and Wuu had indeed come direct from
Willow?wane to Hive­hom, other passengers had not. Ryo fought to conceal
his nervousness as a bright?eyed Servitospector went through his
identification. It seemed to Ryo that a lot of time was spent studying
the identiplate.

Eventually they were passed through, accompanied by the kind of polite
indifference the inhabitants of the capital reserved for those citizens
unfortunate enough to have been born on other worlds. Ryo was too
relieved at having successfully passed identification to feel any upset
at such chauvinism. Wuu seemed to know where he was at all times and
quickly located a hotel on Level 75, which was reasonably close to the
city center.

Save for areas of historic importance, the center of Daret for
twenty?five prime levels served only the growing Thranx government.

As their transport module carried them along wide corri­dors Ryo noticed
burrows with stone facings. This was the heart of the eternal city of
Daret, and Daret was the heart of the modern Thranx civilization.
History pressed close all around him.

If he was slightly overwhelmed, Wuu was exactly the opposite. "Doesn't
this mean anything to you?" Ryo asked him, gesturing out the module's
single forward port. "Doesn't such grandeur inspire your poet's mind?"

"Yes, it does. Ten thousand years of bureaucrats."

They were to have begun their search the following morning, but Wuu
insisted there was no need for hurry and offered to show Ryo more of the
city. For example, there were the fabled Echo Falls. These fell from an
opening in the underside of the River Moregeeon past a hundred and fifty
levels to a great artificial cavern where the tremen­dous power of the
vertical cascade was harnessed to supply energy for the city.

This and the poet's descriptions of other wonders caused Ryo to
hesitate, but only briefly. It was unreasonable to expect the
authorities to trace him quickly, but it worried him nonetheless and he
was anxious to begin the hunt as soon as possible. Wuu grumbled at the
thought of having to plunge so soon into the morass that was
officialdom, and it had been Ryo's turn to supply the enthusiasm.

It was all basically so simple. "We just locate this Broh­welporvot,"
he'd explained blithely to the poet, "and he di­rects us from there."

Wuu had executed a gesture indicative of third?degree naivete mixed with
fourth?degree intimations of absurdity. "My boy, you are bright and
persistent, but there is still much you have to learn. Consider the
second communica­tion that was received by your premate, the one that
went to such pains to deny everything which had been communi­cated
before. If we inquire after this perplexing fellow we would doubtless
discover that he has been transferred to a `rest' position somewhere
many light?years from here. That is, if we can find anyone or any
machine willing even to admit to his existence.

"In addition, such an inquiry would attract unwanted at­tention from
whoever compelled him to send that second negative communication. You
must know, my boy, that I am not at all convinced there is anything to
all this blather about alien monsters and such. I simply find the
prospect of pursuing so outrageous a rumor attractive.

"But if the opposite should be in some manner true, then we are
likely?unless we are very careful?to find our­/selves /shipped off to
some distant resting burrow until we agree to drop our private search.
In any case, we will not find truth. If we would discover the latter, we
must be cir­cumspect as we delicately circumvent."

But even Wuu's most persuasive manner and persistent questions drew
nothing in the way of useful information. As the days passed Ryo was
beginning to believe that Fal's relative really /had /suffered a
temporary mental break­down.

Likewise discouraging to further inquiry was the condes­cension with
which they were treated, because they came from a relatively undeveloped
and unimportant colony world. This didn't trouble the philosophical Wuu,
but it rankled Ryo's pride and went counter to everything he'd learned
as a larva about the equality of all citizens. Clan­ and hivemothers
excepted, of course.

When a month had passed, even the normally indefatiga­ble Wuu was
beginning to show signs of losing interest. "We may have played the game
to its conclusion, my boy," he murmured one evening in their hotel room.
The hotel ran from Level 75 to Level 92. It was comfortable and boasted
an exit on each level, but its novelty had long since worn off for both
of them.

It is only natural for the interest of a poet to wane, Ryo thought.
Desperately he tried to find some way to convince his sponsor to
continue the quest, for without Wuu's knowl­edge and other resources Ryo
knew he would never come any closer to the truth of the matter.

It came to them both as they boredly watched a fiction­alized
dramatization of the confrontation between Twentieth Emperor Thumostener
and King Vilisvinqen of Maldrett over possession of the Valley of the
Dead between the an­cient cities of Yelwez and Porpiyultil. It was
tense, stylized, and in keeping with proper anachronisms, militaristic.

"The military. Of course." Ryo put aside his drinking spout, letting it
slide back into the wall as he raised up on his sleeping lounge. "We
have to contact the military again."

Wuu sounded tired. "I've told you before, my boy, that any direct
inquiry as to the whereabouts or even the exis­tence of this
Brohwelporvot fellow will draw either useless replies or unwholesome
questions. Still," and he made a gesture of second?degree indifference,
"since we have dis­covered nothing so far, perhaps it is worth a risk."

"No, no?I've no intention of going to the military au­thorities about
Brohwel," Ryo replied.

Wuu set aside his portable drinking siphon and gazed cu­riously at his
young companion. "Why else would we want to contact the military?
Unless, of course, you plan a sim­ple march up to the nearest office and
intend once there to ask outright about the truth of their recent
acquisition of a shipload of alien monstrosities?"

"Nothing of the sort. You see, I have another and wholly legitimate
reason for making my way all the way from Willow?wane to Hivehom to
contact military authorities."

"Don't be abstruse with me, boy," muttered Wuu. "I'm tired and feeling
my age. One puzzle at a time is enough."

"It's just this ... " Ryo began.

 

The military center was not located with the other gov­ernment offices.
It lay in a cube complex of its own near the outskirts of the
metropolis. The two supplicants paid the transport module and entered
through a triple?wide en­trance off the busy corridor.

Swarms of workers scuttled through passageways and worked behind
counters and at saddle?desks. Most of them displayed inlaid military
insignia. Here and there Ryo no­ticed individuals in whose chiton
gleamed crimson four­ pointed stars to match his own. They were rather
more common than he'd been led to believe, but his thoughts were too
busy for the revelation to depress him.

He turned to face Wuu and found the poet staring at him expectantly, for
now the burden of inquiry fell on Ryo's thorax. He led the way into the
complex.

Eventually they found their way to a large information booth. The
eight?sided interior was filled with chattering, whistling soldiers. No
explanatory signs marred the various sides, nothing differentiated one
from its neighbor. Ryo strode boldly to the nearest and looked across
the counter at a busy Thranx. Sixteen fingers flew across an
intimidat­ing keyboard.

"Pleasant day to you," Ryo said to the soldier by way of introduction
and greeting.

She looked over at him and he saw the light glance from the pair of
emerald metal circles set into her left shoulder.

"This is Information West and what is it you need to know?" she inquired
pleasantly.

"It's just that?that ..."

"Yes?" His hesitation had not aroused any suspicions in her. Not yet,
anyway.

He looked helplessly back toward Wuu. The poet ig­nored his stare, was
gazing past him and admiring the sol­dier's ovipositors. Ryo inhaled,
turned to the saddled sol­dier, and threw out the intricate half?lie.

"We are from Willow?wane. I am called," and he showed her the fake
identiplate as he pronounced his adopted name. "I have many relatives in
a small town called Paszex. It lies far to the north of the capital and
is the northernmost hive on the planet save for Aramlemet.

"Four years ago Paszex was attacked and ravaged by a group of AAnn. Many
died and property damage was substantial.

"At that time we were promised increased warship Pa­trols for the
isolated communities of the northern conti­nent. No such developments
have been forthcoming. I and my adoptive sire," and he indicated the
expressionless Wuu, "have traveled all this way at our own expense, to
get some satisfaction."

"I see," said the soldier thoughtfully, offering no com­ment. She
swiveled her saddle to face the large console. The information displayed
there was canceled by the touch of a key. Further touches produced
different information.

"Here we are," she said, speaking without turning from the screen.
"Record of the attack and related briefings. You say you have relatives
still living in this Paszex?"

Ryo stiffened, which is not easy for a Thranx to do, but it was too late
to back out or change his story. "I was there myself during the attack.
I know what it's like firsthand. Not a pleasant experience."

He worried overmuch. The question had been put out of curiosity, not
suspicion. The soldier did not follow it up. "I've never had the chance
for combat patrol myself," she said, a mite less stiffly, "but I've
studied many records of such incidents. I sympathize with
you?informally, of course." She hesitated, considering. "You need to see
some­one in the office of the Supervising Officer in Charge of
(round?Side Protection, Colonial Burrow. That can be ar­ranged, I think,
and?"

Ryo hurriedly interrupted, making the complex gesture necessary to
excuse his discourtesy. "If you don't mind," he said, "I've promised my
relatives and clanmates back home that I'd try to find out exactly why
the AAnn chose our poor little hive for attack. Paszex contains nothing
of mili­tary interest. Their purpose in attacking it remains a mys­tery
to all who live there."

"Death without purpose is ever a mystery," murmured Wuu.

"The dead are dead." The soldier eyed Ryo curiously. "What benefit could
you and your friends derive from knowing the AAnn's motivations?"

"Such information would ease the pain that arises from uncertainty in
the minds of the living," Wuu put in, "and perhaps also show us how to
make ourselves less attractive to attack."

"I can understand that," the soldier said.

"So we'd prefer, at least at first," said Ryo, "to see someone in charge
of?oh," and he tried to make it sound casual, "general xenology. /Then
/we could go to the Colo­nial Burrow Division of the Ground?Side
Protection Office and find out why we're not getting the protection we
were promised."

The soldier?clerk was uncertain. "The Xenology Ministry of Information
is located among the general administrative offices at Daret Center. I
fail to see why you'd put such a request to a military office."

"Because the motivation resulted in military action and a military
psychology is involved," Ryo replied.

She stared back at him speculatively a moment longer. Then her curiosity
vanished. Others waited impatiently be­hind Ryo and Wuu and it was not
her business to analyze the requests of Outsiders, only to answer them.

"Of course. A perfectly reasonable request," she mut­tered. "The
department you wish to visit is normally closed to nonmilitary
inquiries. But since you've come such a long way I will see what I can
do for you."

"Thank you," said Wuu. "Up till now we've had very little help. We're
very tired. Your assistance is most wel­come."

"It's no bother," said the soldier, gratified.

The soldier studied her readouts as her fingers danced on the keyboard.
"Xenology has its own divisions and subburrows, and a staff devoted to
Motivational Analysis."

"That sounds promising," Ryo said.

"Here you are, then." She touched some keys and a pink plastic wand
emerged from a hole. She picked it up, in­serted it briefly into another
hole. There was a pulse of light within the counter and a soft buzz.
Then she handed it across the counter to Ryo.

"That's your directional pass." Rising in the saddle, she pointed to her
left, toward a corridor. Stripes in a dozen different fluorescent colors
ran along the framing walls, parallel to the floor.

"Follow the pink stripe," she instructed them. "Eventu­ally you'll reach
the Xenology Burrow. Motivational Anal­ysis is located on the right. If
you become disoriented or have any questions," she indicated the hole in
the counter, "there are information?access points like this one set in
the walls. Insert your pass for additional information." She set­tled
back into her saddle.

"Thanks to you. Thanks greatly," said Ryo, taking the tiny wand. "Good
day and night and a second metamor­phosis to you."

"Good luck." The soldier was already talking politely to the next
supplicant. Ryo was far more gratified than of­fended by the abrupt
dismissal.

The tunnels and corridors of the military complex seemed endless but no
more so than those of Central Ad­ministration where they'd wandered
hopelessly for days. They descended a dozen levels and crossed whole
cubes before the use of the pass stick and judicious questioning of
passersby finally brought them to an entranceway marked
XENOLOGY?MOTIVATIONAL ANALYSIS. Ryo slipped the pass into the hole in
the door, which parted obediently.

They stood in a circular, domed chamber. Three desks occupied the three
triangular divisions of the chamber to left, right, and straight ahead.
Peculiar creatures were mounted on the walls and tridimensional murals
of alien landscapes camouflaged chip files and ceiling. Ryo shook as if
he were preparing to mate.

An efficient?looking soldier in a green vest greeted them. Three
metallic green stars and one brown one were set into his shoulder.

"What service may I perform for you, sirs?" lie did not ask what they
were doing in the chamber. Without the proper pass, they would not have
been admitted. He natu­rally assumed they were on legitimate business.

Ryo repeated the story he'd told the information clerk.

"Yes, I recall many of those sporadic and nasty little attacks on
Willow?wane," the soldier said sadly. "Your world is not the only colony
to suffer such attention. There have been many such incidents. Too many.
But we are sci­entists here, not combat burrow. There is no penalty for
expressing opinion, however."

"It's refreshing to hear," Ryo admitted.

"Nothing of the sort ever touches us here, on Hivehom. The AAnn would
never risk that extreme a provocation. Their elaborate explanations
would not be strong enough to rationalize away an attack on the mother
world itself ­assuming they could get through the defenses, of course.

"So they content themselves with irritating us. Eventu­ally such
practices may bring about the war they strive so assiduously to avoid.
Meanwhile they test our weapons and reactions and readiness far from
areas of Thranx power."

"Precisely the problem we're here to address," Ryo said.

"And redress," Wuu added, for good measure.

"Naturally, I sympathize with your concern," the soldier said. "You wish
explanations and answers. You've had no trouble from the AAnn since the
incident you speak of?"

"No," Ryo admitted, "but we?"

"Come with me, please." The officer stepped back, made a sign to his
busy pair of associates. There was some enigmatic professional
discussion following which Ryo and Wuu were led into another room behind
the outer chamber.

A large screen dominated the far end. Banks of chips set in proper file
casings covered the entire right?hand wall. A dozen comfortably padded
saddles filled, the floor of the dimly lit room.

The officer moved along the wall, finally settled on a key, touched it.
A sliver of rectangular plastic popped into view. He inserted it into
the projector in the back wall, then handed Ryo a small cube dotted with
indentations.

"This controls the speed, direction of movement, and other functions of
the projector," he explained. "I've run it up to the section that deals
with the attack on your home. Other such incidents are also documented
on this chip. The chip reviews the history of such attacks and goes into
detail on AAnn motivational psychology." He started toward the doorway
to the outer chamber.

"If the material displayed does not answer your ques­tions, I'll be
happy to talk further with you if you finish before I go off shift. If
I'm gone, the evening shift will be happy to assist you." The door
closed behind him.

Wuu looked disappointed. "I haven't worked this hard and come all this
way to look at sanitized military histo­ries."

"Nor have I," said Ryo, "but it's a start, at least. Running the chip
will give us time to decide what to try next."

They activated the projector and soon Ryo's thoughts were not on what to
do next but on the material playing across the screen. He was at once
fascinated and appalled as the reconstruction resurrected those
confused, frightened moments of so long ago ...


  Chapter Seven

 

After discussion of the attack and lengthy dissection of AAnn attitudes,
the chip Nil I reported the stepped?up patrols around Willow?wane, the
official protest lodged with the AAnn by ambassador Yeltrentrisrom, and
a sta­tistical summation integrating the attack on Paszex with all
similar AAnn adventures.

Words, Ryo thought bitterly. Words and figures. Lives lost and burrows
shattered?all interpreted statistically, for the benefit of study. He
let the machine run. It began to describe other attacks on Willow?wane
and on Colophon.

When the chip concluded Ryo was no nearer an idea on how they should
proceed. Wuu was seated in one of the saddles, contemplating?or
sleeping. Either way he was not to be disturbed, Ryo knew.

He peered through the doorway into the outer chamber. Three new soldiers
occupied the three desks now.

The nearest looked toward the partly open door. "Hav­ing trouble with
the projection unit? The depth perceiver has a tendency to go fiat
sometimes."

"No, nothing like that," Ryo replied. "I thought I had a question, but
it can wait until the others return."

"That will be tomorrow morning," the soldier said pleas­antly. "Are you
sure I can't help?"

"Perhaps later." Ryo shut the door and retreated back into the study
room. "Wuu, I wonder if perhaps we might?"

The poet was not in his saddle. He was standing opposite the chip bank,
studying numbers and readouts.

"What are you doing?" The poet did not comment, how­ever, simply
continued to scan the wall.

"Ah," he muttered at last. "Here we are. Index." He touched controls and
the little scanner set in the wall began to run through its enormous
volume of information on alien contacts in which the military had been
involved. In addi­tion to the AAnn, there was material on the Astvet and
Mu'atahl, two semi?intelligent nonspace?going races. The bulk of
information dealt with nonsentient species with an emphasis on the
carnivorous and belligerent types that the military was most likely to
confront. But nothing touched on the mysterious rumor they'd come
a?tracking.

A click sounded as the three sections of the door slid apart. The
soldier who'd offered to help Ryo walked into the room.

"You're not supposed to be doing that," he told Wuu reproachfully.

"Sorry." Wuu made a gesture of polite indifference as he shut down the
index scanner. "You can understand our anxiety to learn all we can after
coming all this way. Un­fortunately, the information we're seeking
doesn't seem to be in here." He gestured at the quiescent scanner.

The door sealed behind the soldier as he scuttled over. "See," he said
to Ryo, "perhaps I can assist you after all. I'm very good with the files."

His eagerness to help, the friendliness that seemed genu­ine, led Ryo to
exchange a gesture with Wuu that literally meant, "Why not?" They'd
reached a dead end, their bur­row search seemed blocked with granite.

When they put the query to him he responded with a reaction they'd
already encountered: laughter. Not as loud or hysterical as some, but
laughter still.

"I'm sorry. You must excuse my discourtesy," he told them, "but what you
say is nonsense. Fascinating how ru­mors acquire a life of their own."

"Isn't it?" Wuu agreed resignedly. "And yet, rumor is the seed from
which the flower of truth often blossoms, nurtured by hope and persistence."

"That's true." The soldier's attitude suddenly shifted. "I think I've
heard that parable before."

"Really?" Wuu looked pleased.

"Yes. A colonial poet is the author. One of the better known outworld
wordweavers. Quuzelansem."

"Wuuzelansem," Ryo said, gesturing toward his compan­ion. "This is he."

For an instant the soldier was stunned. Wuu executed a gesture of modest
affirmation.

"It is I, and my pleasure it is to meet a reader/ listener."

"I am an avid follower of your work, sir, and that of Ciccikalk's
Ulweilber and Trequececex as well?It's an honor to meet you, sir."

"Tut! Small honor, when our inquiries are met with laughter and scorn."

"Now, what then did you honestly expect, sir?" the sol­dier said
unapologetically. "A question like that, a query so absurd as to?to?" He
broke off abruptly. Neither of the two visitors was laughing with him.
Without a word he turned, checked to make certain the door was sealed,
then returned to confront them.

When he spoke again it was softly, his whistles barely audible. Then he
chose a chip from the wall files, seem­ingly at random, inserted it into
the projector and set it to playing. The actual material he ignored,
pausing at the control cube only long enough to set the volume
moderately high?just loud enough to mask their conversation, low enough
not to attract attention.

"Wuuzelansem, I know your three books and hear that you're working on a
fourth epic."

"As indeed I am, and a shadow play as well." It was then that Wuu had
his small inspiration. "Would you like to hear something of the work in
progress?"

"Would the eriat worm like to grow in a manure pile?" The overwhelmed
soldier settled himself back into a saddle.

Wuu then gave a bravura solo performance from his new shadow play,
executing all six parts and all six shadows as well, including that of a
crippled larva. Ryo watched with as much delight as the soldier while
the poet perfectly mimed the limbless larva with its blank, hungry stare
and then shifted without a gesture break into the part of a hundred­
year?old hivemother.

When all was done, it was everything the two spectators could do not to
whistle their applause. Wuu stood before them, panting heavily.

"Something of an exertion." His sides were heaving. "It's difficult
enough to write theater without having to be the theater as well. But
one performs where one must, in the presence of demand, just as one
takes inspiration when it is offered. I hope it was enjoyed."

The soldier left his saddle. His gestures, which until now had been
acclamatory, turned suddenly furtive. He leaned close, the projector
continuing to declaim nearby.

"Inspiration? I will give you some inspiration, Eint­Master. Inspiration
of the darkest kind. Can you write blind poetry, as full of threats and
nightmare and fear as the surface of a moon? Oh, I'll give you
inspiration, yes!"

"Can it be that the stories are true, then?" blurted Ryo, unable after
all this time to believe.

"No, the stories are not true, but the rumors are. As true as rumors can
be. Understand, I am only a liaison, not even a subofficer. I'm far too
low in the castes to know; merely one of second rank. To reach the truth
you would have to meet with an officer of the fifteenth rank, and even
then I am not so sure he would know."

"So high," Wuu murmured. Only one rank lay above the fifteenth in Thranx
military hierarchy, and that was Burrow Marshal level.

"What of the substance of these rumors, then, if not of truth?" Ryo
pressed their sympathetic friend.

"The substance is the stuff of nightmare. As the smoke says, one of our
ships was prowling out the Arm along the galactic plane and higher." His
whistles were short and sharp, the clicks brief and nervous. "It found
/something. /Nobody seems to know precisely what. Many who know just the
rumors are convinced it's part of a complicated exercise to prepare us
in case such a find should someday actually take place.

"It's a hereditary fear, of course, this anticipation that some
immensely powerful, malignant alien race is lying in wait for us Out
There. It stems from our ancestral terror of the ancient surface world.
Now all Hivehorn is our burrow and other worlds as well, but the
immensity of the night pit is a greater and more threatening surface
than any we've ever faced.

"For all their boasting and tooth?gnashing, the AAnn have the same fear.
Some horrible alien /something /awaits Out There?the terror that
encircles a burrow dug by un­Thranx hands. The Throle that waited in
hidden lair for our primitive ancestors.

"But if the rumors are true, that wandering ship found a horror that's
grounded in reality, not our racial subcon­scious ..."

Ryo decided not to mention his knowledge of Brohwel­porvot. Loquacious
the fellow had so far been, and Ryo did not want to close down this
wondrous source of informa­tion by letting the soldier know that the
military secret, or rumor, or whatever, had been partially breached
elsewhere.

"... and whatever they found," he was concluding, "is rumored to be
horrible beyond imagining."

"Intelligent?" Wuu asked.

"As I say, I don't even know that anything was actually founts, only
that rumor says it is some form of frightful life. Intelligent or not,
I've no idea. There is intelligence, and then there is alien intelligence.

"The joint?shaking stuff comes not from those in a posi­tion to know
about shape, which after all can only take so many forms, but from those
whose specialties involve mental characteristics. Some rumors say the
creatures are racially homicidal. That they have an inherent and inbred
desire to kill anything and everything that comes their way, including
even their own kind."

"Cannibalistic," Wuu muttered. "Like our ancestors."

"It's worse than that," the soldier said grimly. "Our ancestors at least
slew out of purpose. Apparently these things kill because of abstracts."

"They don't sound properly sentient to me," the poet confessed. "Though
I must say I know certain bureaucrats who might fit the same description."

"It is hot a description?only rumors. And it's no joking matter." He was
so deadly serious that even the normally irreverent Wuu was compelled to
subside.

"You simply haven't heard the stories that have trickled down. Even
among the bravest and most foolhardy of the highest ranks?those who are
for mounting an attack on the AAnn home world?even they are absolutely
terrified by the prospect the discovery of these creatures opens up.
Which may, I remind you again, be nothing more than a clever training
exercise conjured up to test the entire mili­tary caste."

"If that's the case they seem to be doing a lot of work to keep the test
from affecting most of its intended subjects," Ryo said.

"But that's part of it, don't you see?" the soldier said earnestly. "The
uncertainty adds to the effect. Besides, the rumors are only to test the
military. If the information reached the public, the test would be
ruined because its source would have to be disclosed to prevent panic
among the general populace."

"Sounds like the `test' might be a rumor planted to cover the real
rumors." Wuu sounded intrigued. "The web is complicated."

"Whatever it is, truth or rumor, I want no part of it, as you seem to.
If they're trying to find out who's brave or curious enough to come
forth and challenge the rumors in person, they'll have to find someone
besides me."

As he listened to the soldier drone on, for some reason Ryo found
himself thinking of Fal. So very far away now, she was. His thoughts
turned to his clanmates, always so supportive and proud of him. He
thought of his life assign­ment. It wasn't so dull compared to most.
Sometimes it had been downright exciting, even when he had spent most of
his time deliberating in an office chamber instead of work­ing in the field.

Aren't there enough challenges in life, he found himself wondering,
without trying to ferret out the darker secrets of the universe, without
trying to probe regions best left to those appointed to search them?

What am I doing here? came the sudden thought. He looked around the
study chamber, feeling the whole an­cient weight of Hivehom, of endless
Daret and its secretive and bustling military establishment. What was he
doing in that chamber, a simple colonial agricultural specialist, a
glorified fungus tender who followed in the path of those who'd tended
growths in damp tunnels before the coming of reason? Perhaps ...

Unexpectedly, the soldier emphasized a whistle, a proper name: Sed?Clee.
It meant nothing to Ryo, but the force the soldier had put into the
whistle and the terror embodied in his movements when he'd said it were
enough to shock Ryo from his momentary uncertainty.

Something was happening here on Hivehom. Something of vast and
threatening import. It drew him onward while at the same time that
damnably persistent part of his brain which had tormented him since
birth pushed him from be­hind. He plunged recklessly, hungrily onward.
"What is Sed?Clee?"

"Nothing," the soldier replied solemnly.

"Nothing?" Wuu said.

"Nothing. A great deal of nothing, I think."

"Now you're not only being contradictory, young fellow," the impatient
poet muttered, "you're being ab­surd."

"Not at all, sir," was the respectful reply. "When re­searching, one
occasionally comes across irrelevant but interesting information in the
files; `This information destined for Sed?Clee.' `That report returned
from Sed?Clee.' But never any details, any exposition. Don't you see?
Entirely too much nothing comes and goes from what is cataloged as a
tiny military outpost. The volume is far larger than a post of such size
should warrant, and the information is directed to and dispatched from
some of the most esoteric burrows of the military. This one, for example.

"When specifics are absent, an efficient researcher can sometimes glean
information from inference. Rumors constantly emerge about the place.
The one you study is not the first.

"There is more. I've never encountered a soldier who's actually been
there. I've been unable to find anyone who /knows of /anyone who knows
anyone who's ever been there."

"Secret military burial chamber," Ryo suggested.

"Not so secret. After all, the existence of Sed?Clee is known," the
soldier went on. "It's just that it's so obscured. There's so much
formal indifference surrounding the place, not to mention deliberately
casual obfuscation, that it makes one wonder if something of real
importance is stud­ied there."

"You just called it a place," Ryo pointed out.

"Statistics characterize it somewhat. The hive of Sed­-Clee itself is
small. Twenty thousand citizens or so support­ing a few small industries
and a military base, reportedly of modest size. Its exact size is
classified above my level. Cer­tainly the known information doesn't
point to the installa­tion's being responsible for anything remarkable."

"Yet you believe it may have something to do with the rumors we are
tracking?" Wuu asked.

"Pardon if I seem simplistic, sir, but there is nowhere else these
rumors can be ascribed to, so it seems to be the logical place to seek
out. However, a number of /other /frightening things about Sed?Clee are
well known and have nothing to do with rumor.

"I am not able nor personally interested in going there. If the rumors
are no more than rumors then it would be a waste of time. If they are
true then I especially do not want to go there.

"But since you two are interested, and because of the admiration I hold
for your work, Eint?Master, and the honor you've done me in performing
here this day, I have told you all that I know. There is nothing
more?save that I will show you what is/ known* */to be intimidating
about Sed?Clee."

They returned to the outer chamber. Under cover of in­nocuous
conversation designed to allay the interest of the soldier's two
associates, they proceeded to study his per­sonal desk monitor.

Touches of the keyboard generated a map of Hivehom's northernmost
continent. This map was then enlarged and the resolution steadily
increased until they found them­selves looking at a map of a corner of
that continent.

Near its polar crest lay a region of cold where water sometimes never
became a liquid, where a Thranx could survive only with environmental
protection barely a step simpler than that required for survival in space.

Slightly to the south of the tiny permanent ice cap, just below the thin
line of tundra that marked the end of the treeline, lay a tiny hive:
Sed?Clee. The military installation it supported was not revealed until
the soldier touched sev­eral additional keys, whereupon a bright red dot
emerged to the north of the hive.

A true destination, at last! Ryo stared at the map, at the source of
rumor. "There must be some transportation if it's an integrated,
formalized hive."

Other keys were touched. A network of green threads appeared on the map.
Only one, so thin it was almost invis­ible, ran from the northern city
of Ghew?through six smaller hives scattered across vast undeveloped
plains?to Sed?Clee.

"If I had a secret I wanted to hide, I'd be hard pressed to find a more
isolated place," Wuu declared.

The soldier glanced up at him and gestured with his an­tennae for them
to keep their whistles down. The other two operatives were staring
curiously at them.

"Yes," the soldier said a little too loudly. "Now, if you're interested
in other worlds on the periphery of our current sphere of exploration
... " The other soldiers returned to their respective tasks.

"I'd agree that this hive," their friend went on more quietly, "is about
as isolated as you can get and still be on Hivehom." He scrambled the
map and shut down the monitor. When he returned his attention to them
his man­ner was entirely professional.

"I wish you luck and good hunting in your research, gentlesirs." He
turned to gaze appreciatively up at Wuu. "And special thanks to you,
sir, for your kindnesses."

"A trifle, my estimable young friend."

They made their own way out.

 

There was no doubt now where their hunt was going to take them, Ryo
mused, but there was a city stop Wuu in­sisted on making first.

Though they would have no reason to go outside the shielded environs of
Sed?Clee, the poet insisted they travel prepared for any eventuality.
Even a transport module could break down.

Despite the diversity to be found in the immense hive they still had
difficulty locating a firm that sold as exotic an item as cold?climate
attire. It took several days.

The purveyor who provided the clothing asked no ques­tions. However
perverse, hobbies were the business of none but their adherents. So she
simply accepted credit from Wuu and did not inquire what the two oddly
matched strangers intended to do with their bizarre purchases.

They checked out of their hotel and took an internal transport to the
northernmost main module terminus. From there they traveled for more
than an hour in line with hundreds of similar modules, until they
reached the out­skirts of the metropolis.

Soon they had been switched and were accelerating with perhaps fifty
other modules in a train heading due north. At regular intervals modules
split off from front or back of the column. Forty, thirty, then
twenty?two, according to Ryo's count, were traveling steadily
north?northwest.

Some time earlier the transport train had emerged from subterranean
concourses to travel on repulsion rails above the surface. The character
of the landscape had begun to change. In place of the valley of the
Moregeeon and its towering forests of ventilation pipes and air intakes,
patches of steamy jungle alternated with cultivated fields and stack
clumps marking the location of underground manufacturing facilities.

Hives were scattered more widely as they entered the second day of
travel. They had already passed the good­sized cities of Fashmet and
Pwelfree and hives were far­ther apart. Most of the modules they had
departed Daret in concert with had split off, but they periodically
acquired others and, on balance, the train had shrunken by only half a
dozen.

Wuu's considerable resources enabled them to have the luxury of a
private long?travel unit, about a third the size of a normal
eight?passenger module, with two sleeping lounges and extensive hygienic
facilities. The compara­tively lush method of travel was something of a
risk to their carefully cultivated anonymity, but one that Ryo was glad
they'd decided to chance. It was a long way to Sed­-Clee.

Though the module was equipped with automated food service, from time to
time they varied their diet by pulling out of line to sample the
distinctive regional cuisines of hives scattered along the route. Meal
concluded, they would slip back to the main track and link up with the
next cluster north.

Gradually the stack clusters marking the locations of subterranean
industrial complexes gave way to taller, thin­ner pipes belching treated
gases, each above a well ­developed mine. Haves became smaller, were set
farther apart, and the jungle began to thin out. In clumps and on shady
hillsides grew vegetation Ryo did not recognize.

"It makes one appreciate Willow?wane all the more," Wuu observed one day
as they sat watching scenery fly past their module's right?side port,
"when you realize that the mother world itself is a harsher place."

"I've thought that many times these past several days." Ryo didn't take
his eyes from the passing landscape.

Days later found them climbing through a rugged moun­tain pass. Jungle
assaulted the lower elevations, but higher up the rocky slopes they
could just discern tall, symmetri­cal growths. Scrapers, Wuu said they
were called. Trees that had thin, sharp excuses for leaves instead of
the broad, flat variety they were familiar with. The exteriors of such
plants were hard and rough, not like the smooth skin of normal
vegetation. The covering was tougher and thicker than the bark enclosing
the toughest jungle hardwoods. Vines and creepers turned thin and
sickly, though lichens and mosses seemed to thrive. It was very strange.

Three days before endmonth, they came downslope out of the mountains. On
their northern flanks the jungle had vanished completely. Plants were
still cultivated, but sparsely. Only a few vegetables flourished on the
frigid northern plain. Hardship made locally grown vegetables terribly
costly, but the price was high enough to encourage their planting.

On endmonth, twenty?two days after leaving Daret, they reached Ghew, the
northern hive city. But Ryo and Wuu did not pause; as soon as the
transport computer switched them through they were hurrying north toward
the first of the six hives that were links in an irregular chain leading
to distant Sed?Clee.

It was when they were traveling between Ublack and Erl?o?Iwwex,
ascending through a stretch of open hilly country at just forty
kilometers an hour, that Ryo woke to the nightmare. He was lying on his
right side, preferred for sleeping, near the rear of the module. Only
two units trav­eled in tandem with them now, both ahead of their own.
He'd once studied the nightmare he now lived, but the shock of seeing
it?just outside the window was enough to make him cower on his lounge
and pull the cocoon wrap practically over his antennae. "Wuu!" The poet
raised him­self sleepily and stared across the module at his companion.
"What's the trouble? What is? ..." Then he noticed the direction of
Ryo's motionless gaze and turned to stare at the same window.

Wuu climbed down from his sleeping lounge and walked over to the window.
He pressed a truhand against it, felt an odd tingling sensation which he
didn't identify until he touched the tips of his antennae to the glass:
It was Cold. Deep Cold that seeped even through the sealed port.

Moving to the module's self?contained climate controls, he turned up the
interior heat and humidity. When the room had warmed further, Ryo, not
wishing to appear the larva, slid from his own lounge to join Wuu in
inspecting the phenomenon dominating their view.

"It looks like rain," he whispered in amazement. "I re­member studying
it briefly, long ago. During Learning Time."

"I've seen recordings of clith myself," Wuu said in grim fascination,
"but never thought to see in person. It is rain. Perfectly ordinary,
everyday rain such as falls every morn­ing in Ciccikalk. Except?this is
frozen."

"Frozen," Ryo echoed, not savoring the modulation of the strange term.

Little white flakes continued to beat and smear them­selves against the
module window, reminding Ryo of noth­ing so much as white blood falling
from a cracked and bleeding sky. Cracked wide open like the body of an
un­wary traveler such as himself, much as he might be if he were trapped
outside in such a region for more than a few minutes.

The frozen rain continued to fall. Once the immediate novelty wore off,
Wuu rushed to dictate into his recorder, to record several lines that he
intended to incorporate into a long narrative poem of delicious horror,
to be completed and refined after their return to Willow?wane.

The climb leveled off and soon they were descending. As they did so the
frozen rain thinned and blue sky showed through?not the familiar pale
blue of home or Ciccikalk or even Daret, but a sharp, terrifyingly
brilliant blue that seemed only one step removed from the blackness of
empty space.

Oddly enough, Ryo was more afraid of such Deep Cold here, on the surface
of the mother world, than he'd been while traveling from Willow?wane to
Hivehom. Deep Space was supposed to be deadly. But to see rain?ordinary,
friendly lung?moistening rain?falling in hard little chunks on the
surface of the center of the Thranx race was far more horrifying than
the cold of interstellar space ever could be.

The scraper trees continued to grow tall but not quite as thickly as
they had on the other side of the hills; under­growth was dense and
dark. Clinging to branches and accu­mulating in mounds and drifts was
the omnipresent white, frozen rain.

Ryo stood back from the window. Surely, he thought, even if the rumors
are true, even if there is something to the tale of alien monstrosities
being held at Sed?Clee, noth­ing could be more alien or frightening than
this awful, sterile, white land.


  Chapter Eight

 

The fourth hive in the chain of six was well behind them and they soon
hummed through the fifth. Then they were alone save for a couple of
passen­gers in the single small module ahead of them.

Eventually, with the frozen rain still falling slowly from the sky, the
module mercifully dipped underground again. Ryo was unreasonably
thankful for the familiar warmth of confining earth. Lights soon
intensified around them and they pulled into the dirtiest terminal he'd
ever seen.

Every carrier station he'd ever passed through had cen­tered on a
switching circle, a nexus of repulsion rails that fanned out in
different directions. Not in Sed?Clee. The track simply curved up
against an unloading platform be­fore arcing back the way they'd come.

End of the rail, Ryo thought. No travel, no transport beyond this point.
Nothing lay beyond Sed?Clee. He helped Wuu with their bulky baggage,
whose contents he fervently hoped would never have to be unpacked. They
ambled out of the module into the chill but reasonably comfortable air
of the station.

The two who'd occupied the module ahead of them could be seen talking
with several other citizens. Other than that the terminal was largely
devoid of activity.

As Wuu and Ryo walked past the small module ­servicing section Ryo
overheard terms and words as unfa­miliar as ancient Thranx hieroglyphs.
The locals displayed a slowness of movement and an irritability that
bordered on the discourteous. That was probably understandable in light
of the harsh life they had here. He wondered at the reason for
establishing such a hive.

"Experimental perhaps," he suggested to Wuu. "Surely a formal hive isn't
required simply to aid in support of the military base."

"I did some research prior to our departure, my boy. A small chromite
mine lies nearby, and some cobalt as well. The ore bodies lie directly
beneath the town, of course. Both minerals are sufficiently important to
justify the es­tablishment of a small hive. Ah, there, you see?" He
pointed to his left.

So small was the terminal that the passenger and :freight lines ended in
the same chamber. Ryo noted the huge hopper modules, some already loaded
with ore. Machines could be heard, working behind the modules, though it
was hard for Ryo to imagine operators who could function effi­ciently
under such isolated and depressing conditions.

With considerable effort and much grace they managed to wangle the
location of the hive's two small hotels from a passing terminal worker.
The one they selected was hardly appealing, but at least they didn't
have to worry about attracting attention by choosing accommodations too
luxuri­ous?none such were to be had.

The hotel was located on the sixth of the hive's twelve levels. Actually
it was the eleventh level because there were five "zero" levels above
the first, a phenomenon neither Wuu nor Ryo had ever encountered before.
The five were of the same dimensions and were filled not with homes and
work areas but with insulation, to help shield the comfort­able climate
below from the heat?sucking surface.

Upon inquiring, out of morbid curiosity Ryo thought, Wuu was informed
that the surface temperature was cur­rently ?5° C and that even in
midseason summer it rarely rose above 15°.

To Ryo, zero degrees, the solidifying point of water, seemed cold enough
to freeze the blood in his body. The idea of being somewhere where the
temperature was ac­tually below that was like visiting hell itself.

They settled in, taking the evening meal at the hotel's own small
restaurant. The fare was simple, devoid of dress­ings or gravies. The
meat was pungent and tough, but edi­ble. The following morning they
started to explore the hive and ask questions.

Seeing no reason to conceal it, Wuu announced himself to be the
well?known colonial poet, but was disgusted to learn that none of the
citizens they questioned had ever heard of him. "We don't have much time
for poetry or any other kind of entertainment here," one informed them.
He was a middle?aged male whose body looked like it had been run through
the ore crusher a few times. "I'm afraid what few pleasures we have are
of the less refined variety."

Ryo had never thought of poetry as being particularly refined. It was
just something any moderately aware intelligence paid homage and
attention to. But the princi­pal recreation in Sed?Clee appeared to
consist of various forms of strenuous physical activity, surprising in
light of the hard work required in the two mines.

Several days' indirect questioning failed to elicit the loca­tion of the
military?complex entrance, so they decided to chance asking one of the
citizens directly, rather than risk a formal information terminal.

"The base?" The stunted, old female did not appear sus­picious of the
question. "It's sixty kilometers north of town, of course."

"Sixty north? ..." Ryo was momentarily confused. "But the transport line
ends here in town?at least, the one we came in on did. Is there a
separate, special spur that runs from here to the base?"

The old lady responded with a gesture of second?degree negativity. "No,
there's no other transport rail, youth. All traffic to the base moves on
the surface, in individual vehi­cles."

Like my dependable old A24 crawler back home, Ryo thought, but something
much tougher. "Isn't there any kind of general transport?"

"The workers and soldiers from the base come into town often enough,"
she told them. She didn't have to. Both Ryo and Wuu had seen military
personnel, circles and stars shining from their shoulders, wandering
around the hive since their arrival.

"But they come on military transport at regular inter­vals. Very few
hivefolk ever go out to the base. No one wants to."

"Who does travel out there?" Ryo inquired.

"A few do special work and have permits and special clearance. They use
the same military transportation. I don't know why you're so anxious to
go out there. You don't look like fools. But if you're determined to
try, I can help you a little." She gestured past them, back down the
corridor.

"Third cube, second level, is where the information of­fice is located.
Go and speak to them. Perhaps someone at the base will be in the mood to
indulge idiots. Perhaps you'll be lucky and they'll turn down your
request." She cocked her head to one side. "Tell me, why do you want to
subject yourselves to such a journey?"

"I'm a poet," Wuu said, not bothering to give his name. "I'm doing a
long spiral poem on the military."

"Well, I don't think you'll raise much material out there, if you get
that far," she replied. "They're an uncommuni­cative bunch. Can't say as
how I blame 'em. I can't imag­ine a worse place in the civilized worlds
to be stationed. I'd leave here myself if I could, but I've two unmated
daugh­ters working in the mines and they're all the family I've got.

Having always been surrounded by family and clan­mates, Ryo found her
confession particularly touching. "I am sorry."

"We all have our place," she said philosophically.

"So all nonmilitary visitors have to be cleared through this information
station?"

"I would think so." She preened at a badly damaged left antenna where
some of the feathers were missing, then glanced around and whistled
softly. "If you're as deter­mined as you are crazy, however, you might
have a flagon of juice in the first?level public eatery and ask for an
indi­vidual name of Torplublasmet."

"Why?could he help us?" Ryo asked eagerly.

"He could if anyone could."

Wuu made a gesture of wariness mixed with lack of comprehension. "I
don't understand. Even if this person were capable of doing so, why
should he?"

The ancient one let out a delighted, wheezing whistle. "Because he's
crazy too!" And she turned and waddled off down the corridor.

"What do you think?" Ryo asked Wuu as soon as she was out of sight.

The poet considered. "I made up that story about seek­ing material for a
poem to allay any suspicions she might have had and to answer her
question as to our purpose, but why should we not continue with that? My
credentials can be verified. We are traveling outside official channels
be­cause such interference would inhibit artistic inspiration."

Ryo gestured hesitant concurrence. "I accept that, but will the
authorities at the base?"

"A poet's palate can accomplish miracles, my boy. And perhaps our friend
Torplublasmet "

"He's not our friend yet."

"?will have a suggestion or two."

They ambled off uplevel and located the eatery, but two days passed
before the enigmatic Torplublasmet chose to show himself. As soon as he
did, Ryo found ample reason to agree with the old matriarch's assessment
of him.

Tor was a solitary trapper, one of the few Thranx coura­geous or
foolhardy enough to brave the howling, arctic wilderness above ground.
He wore the skins of dead animals instead of proper clothes, and it was
some time before Ryo could face him without experiencing nausea.

Wuu, on the other hand, seemed to find something kindred in this bucolic
spirit, and by promising the chance to see something "no one else even
suspects may exist," he succeeded in convincing the trapper to convey
them to the distant base.

A faintly voiced hope turned out to have substance when the resourceful
Tor did indeed propose a reasonable excuse for their presence. They
would be fellow trappers, visitors from far?off trapping grounds, come
to sound out the opportunities for peddling some merchandise among the
iso­lated citizens of the base.

 

Days of wandering on the hunter's loosp cart through frozen forest
eventually brought them to a place where the last tree shrank to a
stunted embarrassment and the land stretched into the windswept horizon,
white and completely barren.

It looked like a moonscape to Ryo. He'd never been any­where plants
didn't flourish the year 'round. To find such a blasted landscape here,
atop the mother world itself, was shocking.

Before long they could see the familiar silhouettes of ventilators
ahead, misty in the cold fog. A fence seemed to spring from the ground
before them. It was three meters high and ran to east and west as far as
the eye could see. No signs hung from the fence, no identification.

Ryo forgot the cold, the dry, and the desolation as he struggled to
recall the cover story that Tor had tried to drill into them during the
frigid days of travel from Sed?Clee.

I am a hunter?trapper, he told himself slowly: I've marched over from
the western bulge of the Jezra?Jerg to visit my old friend
Torplublasmet. My old associate and I usually sell bur pelts and rare
meats in Levqumu because it lies in warmer territory than Sed?Clee.

We have a few exceptionally fine mossmel skins with us and we might sell
them at the base. Our old friend Tor is escorting us over so we can
check out the prospects our­selves, as is only right and proper.

Such was the tale that Tor strove to impress on the hapless guard who
emerged with great reluctance from the angular entryway. Moist, warm air
roared from the open­ing like the breath of a gleast. After more than a
quarter month of dry cold, Ryo nearly swooned when the blast reached
him. He was careful, however, to control his reac­tions lest the guard
notice something not in character for a back?country trapper.

After some polite exchanges and minor formalities be­tween Tor and the
guard, they were waved inward. "Enough talk of this miserable weather,
friends," the guard said disgustedly as they strolled in. "Come inside
and mois­ten your spicules."

As they entered, the door closed quickly behind them, the three
triangular sections meeting tightly in the center. The whisper of the
outside vanished.

Following Tor's example, Ryo kept his furs on but un­strapped the belly
latches and shoved the hollowed?out skull and clith goggles back off his
head. He wiggled his newly erect antennae gratefully, glad to faz and
smell once again.

The hunter led them down a winding ramp. Before long they exited into a
modest, busy avenue. Not far above them lay the frozen, clith?coated
wastes of Hivehom's hostile arc­tic. For the moment, though, it was as
if they were back in Daret.

Military personnel scurried everywhere, emerald and crimson, insignia
sparkling from shoulders and foreheads. Only rarely did they espy, a
civil worker. The three oddly garbed strangers drew only occasional
stares, testament to Tor's frequent visits.

Their guide knew precisely where they were headed. From time to time he
stopped to chat briefly with pas­sersby he knew. Soon they stopped for a
drink at a conces­sion. From his observation of the crowd and the size
of the corridors they'd already traversed, Ryo guessed that the base was
much larger than Sed?Clee itself.

Later they strolled down a corridor that paralleled an immense
artificial cavern filled with hybrid aircraft and military shuttles. The
latter, part of the planetary defense network, were narrow, round?winged
craft armed with mis­siles and energy weapons. To Ryo's amateur eye they
looked almost new, and, indeed, none had been flown on anything more
strenuous than training flights.

Having lived through an off?world attack, Ryo felt a, surge of
confidence at the sight of the deadly craft, hiber­nating peacefully
beneath the clith but ready to leap space­ward in defense of the mother
world. Everything required to mount such a defense was here, safely
underground, ex­cept for the ventilators and the forest of electronic
recep­tors that doubtless lay camouflaged somewhere above.

If only we'd had two or three of these warcraft when the AAnn attacked,
he thought. Those broken?plated invaders would have received a lot more
than a simple diplomatic reprimand!

Dwelling on the past was useless, he reminded himself. There was nothing
constructive in retained bitterness. He forced the incident from his
thoughts, concentrated on ad­miring the ranks of gleaming ships. Then
they'd passed be­yond the hangar and were once more making their way
through the warren.

They'd been walking for some time and Ryo's feet were beginning to hurt
around the single footpad and trimmed claw, for his feet were still
swathed in the fur shoes Tor insisted they wear to complete their
hunter's garb. He moved next to Tor. "I know we must be headed
some­where?but where? If this is a tour, I've seen enough."

"It's no tour. Our roundabout course is intentional. So is our walking
instead of taking an internal module. Walking can't be traced.

"There are only two sections of this place I've never been into. Three,
actually, but one of them is the battle command center and we're not
likely to find our answers there. No one's ever told me what goes on
inside the other two and I never bothered to go there and inquire for
my­self. That's what we're going to try today. Surely the best place to
hide something that doesn't exist is in a section where no one's allowed
to go.”

"You say no one's told you what takes place in these two sections," Ryo
said. "Does that mean that you've asked?"

"Of course. Even on this visit?and I mentioned the pos­sibility of alien
monsters this time. Either my friends are not as friendly as I thought,
or their ignorance is genuine. Not one of them professes to know
anything about what goes on in the two maximum?security areas. Even
officers at the level of Burrow Marshal aren't allowed inside with­out
special permission.

"As to the possibility they harbor captured aliens, the thought was met
with derision and laughter."

"Then how are we going to learn anything?" Ryo mut­tered concernedly.

"Let us find the sections first, my impatient friend," the hunter
advised him, "and proceed from there."

Gradually foot traffic thinned around them and they came to a turn where
the corridor was blocked. No side branches here, only the single dead end.

It was very impressive, in its understated fashion. Bold and
effervescent as ever, Tor sauntered unhesitatingly up to the low barrier
that blocked the tunnel. A gate was cut into the left side, near the
tunnel wall. A single officer was seated behind the barrier. Two emerald
stars shone on her shoulder.

There were also two guards, one before the gate, the other behind. They
were not resting in saddles but stood stiffly at the ready. To Ryo's
amazement, each was armed with a large lethal?looking energy rifle held
in firing posi­tion, tight in both foothands with a truhand on the
trigger stud.

Neither of the guards turned a head to study the new arrivals. They
stared in opposite directions, one up the cor­ridor and the other down.
It seemed as if their sole purpose in life was to insure that nothing
approached the barrier unseen. They reminded Ryo of pictures he'd seen
of an­cient warriors standing ready, jaws agape, to defend the primitive
hive.

The officer saddled behind the barrier, however, looked up readily at
Tor's approach and favored him with a greet­ing movement of her antennae.

"You're Tor the hunter, aren't you?"

"That I am. At your service." He executed a fluid ges­ture of
third?degree obeisance combined with two degrees of sexual admiration.

It did not have any visible effect on the officer. "I've heard of you."
She seemed open and friendly. "I am Bur­row Tacticianary Marwenewlix,
tenth level."

Tor took note of her insignia. ."Greetings and warmth to you."

"What may I do for the three of you?" She was eying their pelts with
curiosity and none of the disgust Ryo would have expected.

Moving forward, Tor rested his truhands on the barrier as he spoke. "My
friends are hunter?trappers, as am I. We deal in the skins and skeletons
and corpses of those beasts favored for aesthetic and culinary
application, which beasts the hive dwellers would rather avoid while the
fearsome things still live."

"I know that," she replied. "I have a byorlesnath thorax muff I bought
from a concession in the service corridor. The proprietor told me you
were his supplier."

"Fourth booth, level two?" She gestured in the affirma­tive. "Young
Estplehenzin, yes, I remember. I hope you find the muff to your liking."

"It is quite attractive in its barbaric way?and very warm."

"Then you can understand, as an appreciator of such items, why my
friends and I are always on the search for similar items with which to
supplement our stock."

For the first time she sounded uncertain. "I'm not sure I follow you."

Tor leaned closer, his tone turning conspiratorial. "It's come to our
attention that you might be studying some creatures whose pelts would be
especially marketable. More than just the usual novelties, if you follow
my meaning. Something will have to be done with them when you've
finished your studies. We would be glad to handle any post ­experiment
disposal, with mutual profit to all concerned."

"I've no idea what you're talking about." She added two degrees of
politeness and one of puzzlement. "No such creatures exist in this section."

"Come now, tacticianary," he urged softly, "we've all heard the rumors.
Since no such creatures are being stud­ied anywhere else on the base,
they have to be back there." He gestured past her, down the corridor.
"Or else over to the south in Section W, right? Those are the only two
places in the installation tight enough to hold them, as well as the
rumors."

"They are not here, nor in Section W, because no such things exist,"
said the officer. "The cold has weakened your reason while stimulating
your imagination, hunter. I can enlighten you no further."

"It's not that I'm doubting your word, tacticianary. It's only that the
tales I've been told have been so persistent and inconsistent. If we
could have a quick look for our­selves, why then we could leave easy in
mind that we're not missing out on a special opportunity. Just a quick
look. We wouldn't tell a soul. Don't but rarely meet anyone else to tell
anyway, Outside." He forced a laugh.

"I can't allow you past this point." She was not amused. "You know that."

"Well then, what goes on back there, anyway?"

"Research."

"Real secret research, hmm?"

"Come now, sir. Enough badinage. Surely you realize that if I must turn
away military personnel I could never let one of you past this station,
any more than I am able to relate what kind of research takes place
here. I can say that most of the time I do not know myself."

"Then let us pass," Wuu interjected, speaking only be­cause he saw
chance slipping rapidly away, "and upon our return we'll enhance your
store of knowledge from our own."

She eyed him intently. For a moment Ryo thought that Wuu's instinctively
elegant speech had betrayed them.

The officer's mandibles moved and Ryo feared she was about to ask the
first of many unanswerable questions, when something /whoomed! /from the
far end of the corri­dor. Even the fossilized guards unbent, whirling
with their raised weapons. Flakes of sealant fell from the corridor ceiling.

Tor had clung to the desk for stability. Ryo and Wuu barely managed to
keep their own balance.

There was a disquieting pause as the officer took a step toward the
source of the explosion. A second blast shook them. This time smoke and
a brief flare of orange flame filled the far end. The flame disappeared,
the smoke began to dissipate, and shouts and whistles sounded from
unseen Thranx.

Several appeared from behind the smoke, running to­ward the barrier.
They gestured urgently. Without a word the two guards rushed to join
them and the little group hurried around the bend that had produced the
smoke and fire.

The officer had hesitated before turning back to face her inquisitive
visitors.

"I'm afraid I must ask you gentlesirs to return to the central sector,
preferably to the concession area." An inter­com video console was built
into the barrier. The status indicators on it were going berserk. From
down the corri­dor they could hear the shrill blare of warning whistles.

"We won't get in the way," Tor said with admirable calm. "Maybe we can
help, if you'll allow us to?" He broke off suddenly, speechless with
amazement.

The officer had produced a pistol, which she held in a foothand. It
displayed not the civilized snout of a stinger or of an energy weapon,
but that of a charged?projectile de­vice whose tiny explosive pellets
could blow a person's chi­ton to splinters. "Please return the way you
came," she in­structed them brusquely, with maximum?degree assurance,
"or I will be compelled to kill you here."

"Kill?" Wuu repeated stupidly. It was the first time Ryo had ever heard
the poet at a loss for appropriate words. "We haven't done a thing. We?"

"You have five seconds. One ... two ..."

"Enough. We can argue later." Tor turned and started running. Ryo did
not need further urging. As he ran he turned to glance back over his
shoulder. The officer had resumed her saddle, her hands flying over the
console's con­trols. The ugly projectile weapon lay close at hand atop
the barrier.

"Outrageous!" Wuu was muttering. "Whatever trouble they are experiencing
is no excuse, no excuse. Such a breach of common courtesy, of farewell
custom! They can­not?

"This is a restricted military installation," Tor inter­rupted him
firmly. "They can do anything they wish."

"Surely she would not have shot us with that thing?" Ryo said
wonderingly. They turned down a bend in the tunnel.

"Did you not see her posture or note the inflection in her voice?" Tor
asked. "No question in my mind. She would have blown us apart as we
stood there gaping at her; bang?bang?bang, one?two?three. Good?bye
hunter and his curious friends, just like that."

"But why?" Wuu wanted to know. "What trouble could have provoked such a
threat? It's unthinkable, a throwback to the primitivism of the hive wars."

"She would have done it because she'd been ordered to," Tor told him. "I
can see that neither of you has spent much time around the military. We
can consider her reasoning later." He turned sharply to his right.

"We did not come this way, I think." Ryo looked back­ward again. They
were alone now. "Do you think it's pos­sible ... those explosions ..."

"I don't give a damn what's possible," snapped their guide. "We're not
going to ask questions until they put away projectile weapons and such.
I want no part of any­thing that's got them so jumpy."

"Don't you see, though? This may have something to do with the
monsters," Ryo told him.

"And maybe it has something to do with a top?secret weapon that's going
haywire," Tor responded. "We'll find out later, when mysterious
explosions aren't going off and attractive officers aren't threatening
to shoot us. For the moment I think the sensible thing for us to do is
follow her advice and relax with the other nonmilitary back in the
concession area."

By this time they were running through a particularly narrow corridor
laced with conduits and pipes. "Mainte­nance tunnel," Tor said, stating
the obvious. "There's going to be a lot of confusion in the nearby
corridors. This way, we'll miss the traffic and come out close to the
concession level. I could use a cylinder of hot cider right now, as well
as a little calm. If there's been a general mobilization, we'll learn
about it just as fast and a lot more comfortably while we're drinking."

"Two explosions," Ryo was muttering. "I heard at least two."

"I also heard them, my boy." Wuu was breathing hard and having trouble
keeping up with his younger comrades. "I thought the second closer but
smaller than the first."

"I'd give a great deal to know exactly what's going on," Ryo said.

"Perhaps we'll encounter personnel in the concessions who know something
and are more willing to talk about it," the poet replied. "Confusion and
excitement can loosen the tightest of throats."

Ryo moved on as Tor dropped back to assist the slowing Wuu. Noise
sounded from ahead.

"They're probably trying to shut down power and so forth to the affected
area," the hunter declared. "Maybe the maintenance workers can tell us
something. I may be more cautious, but I'm as curious as either of you
as to what' ,s happening."

"I'll ask." Ryo sent a greeting whistle toward the hidden work crew.
"Greetings, friends! Do you know what is happening? Did you hear the
explosions? Can you tell us? …' He turned the corner and stopped.

The work crew he'd expected to find was not there, but something else was.

The horrors that turned to confront him held Thranx energy rifles in
pulpy, pale fingers. Ryo could not under­stand how anything so
soft?looking could hold even a drinking tankard. Each of the two upper
limbs ended in five digits instead of the normal four, and only one was
opposable.

They stared at each other, Thranx and monster equally surprised. Ryo
wondered if the two were a mated pair. There were some superficial
differences between them, but that was no assurance of mating or even
gender. Certainly neither displayed anything like a pair of ovipositors,
but then, he reminded himself, most mammals practice live birth.

Despite the presence of fur he couldn't be certain they were mammals.
Their bodies were heavily clothed and what fur he could see was
restricted to their heads. So star­tled was he by the unexpected sight,
he forgot to sound a warning.

It wasn't necessary. "What is it, boy?" Wuu called.* *"Is something the
matter?"

"Yes, do they know?" Tor pulled to a halt down the corridor. They did
not round the bend as Ryo had in his haste, but remained out in the main
tunnel.

One of the monsters made a throaty, gargling sound and raised its rifle.
Tor and Wuu immediately turned and bolted back the way they'd come.

Whether out of desire to protect the elderly poet or from some
unconscious urging (he never really knew), Ryo stepped in front of the
rifle and dropped all four arms. The monster glared down at him out of
tiny single?lensed eyes and hesitated. Ryo had confused it.

It did not run after the retreating Thranx. Ryo noticed that the energy
rifle was similar to those the two barrier guards had wielded. Its tip
dropped away from him, but as he took a step backward it came up again.

Ryo stood quietly, staring up at the monster, his anten­nae working
furiously as he examined the creature. There was nothing remarkable
about their smell. It was oddly fa­miliar, in fact.

For their part, the monsters seemed puzzled by Ryo's calm. They
continued to make the strange gargling noises, clearly their method of
communication.

There were other differences besides the amount of fur they displayed.
One was slightly larger than the other and they had different shapes.
The latter could be due to cloth­ing as much as physiognomy, Ryo
reminded himself. They displayed the flexibility of leuks. Their outer
skin was mostly bare of fur but was not hard and composed of jointed
plates as was that of the AAnn. The softness fasci­nated him. The
creatures had outer coverings as thin as paper.

They seemed to fit no known life grouping. As endoskele­tal beings they
probably belonged to a lower order, though the AAnn were an exception to
that otherwise universal rule. If their physiology followed Thranx norms
then the larger of the two should be the female.

They appeared to be tail?less. Their faces were flat and they had
external nostrils instead of antennae; it was likely they could not faz.
When they conversed they showed only four canines, two upper and two
lower. The rest of their teeth seemed relatively flat and blunt. That
suggested they were herbivores, but they didn't act like plant?eaters.
Om­nivorous like us, perhaps, he mused.

Since they were clearly bipedal the lack of a substantial tail puzzled
him. Such an arrangement seemed designed for instability, yet they
appeared to balance themselves without difficulty in the awkward upright
position.

There were only two upper limbs and he wondered if they could double as
another pair of legs like the Thranx foothands. He doubted it. Both
upper and lower limbs ap­peared too specialized for such duality of
employment.

The energy rifles were designed for use with three hands. The monsters
managed by holding the stock of the weapon in the space between arm and
body, thus freeing one hand to work the lower grip and the other the
trigger. They seemed to know exactly what they were doing and he had no
doubt they could fire the weapons whenever neces­sary.

All these observations registered on his brain in seconds. As he'd
hoped, by stepping between their weapons and his companions he'd
prevented shooting. Now they were prob­ably trying to decide whether he
was sacrificial by nature or merely insane.

They were neither as terrifying nor as familiar as he'd hoped. If it
came to physical combat, he thought he had a good chance. They were each
twice his mass, but that skin looked terribly fragile. He hoped there
would be no blood­shed. It was only a matter of time before they were
recap­tured anyway. Surely the hunt had already begun.

His thoughts returned to the two explosions and he won­dered if anything
besides property might have been hurt. As he considered that unnerving
possibility the taller mon­ster tried to stand erect, bumped its head
hard against the corridor ceiling, and made some loud mouth noises. Its
ri­fle's muzzle dipped and Ryo took a step back.

Immediately the smaller one swung its weapon to cover Ryo. He halted.
Clearly this was an escape attempt, and just as clearly it would soon
come to an end. Before that happened he hoped to acquire some
interesting informa­tion.

He was quite calm as the taller monster prodded him with the rifle
muzzle. Evidently it desired that he move. Ryo responded with a
second?degree gesture of negativity. Keeping the tremor from his voice,
he politely whistled that he had no intention of going anywhere and that
it didn't matter because they would be recaptured any mo­ment.

There was no way of telling if the creature understood. In any case it
prodded him harder with the rifle and made a loud mouth noise. Not
wishing to tempt their instincts further, he turned resignedly and
walked in the indicated direction.

The monsters paced him, the larger one taking the lead and the other
walking behind Ryo, occasionally glancing over its shoulder for signs of
pursuit. There were none as yet.

The maintenance tunnel rambled on and on, but they encountered no one.
Ryo used the opportunity to study at close range the monsters'
remarkable method of locomo­tion, marveling continually how they kept
their balance on only two legs and with no tail as counterweight. They
looked very agile. Being more primitive, they were proba­bly capable of
good speed over a short run.

The concealed feet tantalized him. Though larger than his own, the pad
design did not seem all that dissimilar, hinting that each foot probably
formed a wide base ending in a single claw. That would make them
efficient diggers.

They turned still another corner in the dimly lit tunnel and found
themselves facing a sloping ramp. Unhesitat­ingly, the taller monster
started up the ramp. Ryo followed, noticing with interest how the
creature automatically leaned forward to compensate for the slope.

As they ascended, new noises sounded faintly from far down the corridor.
Distant whistles and clicks grew mo­mentarily louder, then faded as a
search party turned in a different direction.

Ryo derived perverse pleasure from contemplating the panic that must
exist among those responsible for insuring the isolation and security of
these creatures. For all their nightmarish appearance they seemed
sensible enough. These were not ravening, bloodthirsty beasts.

Still, there was the nagging matter of the two substantial explosions
and of how this pair came to be in the possession of a set of energy
rifles whose original wielders did not likely surrender them without
contest.

The ramp continued to ascend, turning a gradual spiral. Soon the lead
monster halted, put out a hand that would have forcibly stopped Ryo had
he not slowed willingly.

"I beg your pardon," he said, slightly out of breath, "but this really
is a waste of time, you know." At that point the creature did a
remarkable thing. Showing that it had done some studying of its own, it
reached out with a single flexi­ble hand and clamped all five digits
around Ryo's mandi­bles. Ryo instinctively tried to pull away, but the
monster was quite strong and did not loosen its grip.

Slowly the monster released its hold, put one digit across the two soft
fleshy mandibles that bordered its mouth. It had no horizontally
opposing mouth parts, Ryo noted. He had no idea what the movement
signified, but the grip on his own jaws was clear enough. He kept silent.

The creature disappeared ahead, was back in seconds. It made a
wonderfully fluid gesture to its companion, who prodded Ryo forward.
They emerged from a tiny exit no larger than an enclosed saddle, the
monsters barely squeez­ing their bulks through the opening. Only their
astonishing flexibility permitted it.

They were standing in a storage compartment filled with ventilator
cleaning material. To the right was an unguarded doorway.

The taller monster moved unhesitatingly to the door and worked the
controls with a confidence that hinted at care­ful preparation. There
was a hum. Clith was falling heavily outside. Icy wind poured inward and
Ryo instantly flipped down the headpiece of his skin and the protective
goggles.

"Surely," he told the smaller monster, "you don't intend for us to go
outside? Neither of you has proper clothing." Though extensive, their
attire was not nearly as thick as his byorlesnath pelt, and they had no
head covering what­soever.

The second monster prodder?Ryo forward. After a brief pause during which
he thought he might prefer a quick, hot death from the energy rifle to a
slow, freezing one out­side, he opted to survive as long as possible and
started into the driving clith.

They staggered through the frozen rain. Ryo did not no­tice when they
crossed the boundary fence. He was certain, though, that they'd left the
base well behind because before long they were making a path through the
forest.

That they'd been able to slip out undetected did not shock him. After
all, the weather was dreadful and as slim as the thought was that
someone might try to break into a military base, the concept of breaking
out of one verged on the absurd. He had no doubt the search for the
escaping monsters was continuing more intensively than ever, just as he
had no doubt that it was still confined to the interior of the burrows.

Clearly these creatures were better adapted to cold than his own kind.
They moved steadily through temperatures that would have killed an
unprotected Thranx in minutes. Or an AAnn, he told himself, taking some
encouragement from that thought.

From time to time one would simply wipe accumulated clith from its face,
ignoring the freezing liquid that ran down head and neck. This redoubled
their alienness in Ryo's eyes.

Yet they were not immune to cold. Onrushing night brought a further drop
in the temperature. The clith had ceased falling, which was some relief.
At that point the monsters did the first sensible thing since leaving
the base. They located a considerable hollow beneath several fallen logs
and beckoned him inside. One of them removed a tiny, thin metal tube
from its clothing. Ryo did not recognize the tube, but he was familiar
with the faint aroma of the parti­cles the monster sprinkled from it.

These fell on a pile of reasonably dry wood, which im­mediately burst
into flame. Ryo edged as close to it as he dared, not wanting his pelt
to catch fire. The monsters ex­tended their bare hands toward the
warming flames. The cold was deep enough now to trouble even them.

"Listen, I don't know what you intend to do with me," he said softly,
"but I won't make you a very valuable hos­tage."

This brief speech caused them to begin making strange mouth noises at
each other. Ryo tried to see how they formed the sounds, and it did not
take long to figure out that they employed air from their lungs, or at
least from inside their bodies. Modulation probably came from move­ments
of their flexible mandibles and the peculiar fleshy organ soft creatures
sometimes possessed inside their mouths. They did not communicate by
making word?tones with their mandibles. Soft as the creatures were, that
was not surprising.

They made the sounds in their throats, not at the mandi­bles. He did not
have that internal mouth appendage, but he thought he could approximate
some of the sounds.

A first try produced a mildy surprising little bark. He was not nearly
as startled by the attempt as the monsters were. The smaller one, after
a brief pause, looked straight at him and repeated the noise. He tried
again, forcing him­self to keep his mandibles apart and utilize, only
moving air.

This had an interesting effect on the creatures, for they once* *again
set to gargling furiously among themselves.

He made the sound a third time. The monster responded with a different
one. When Ryo tried to imitate it, he failed completely. His initial
confidence evaporated. His mouth?parts simply could not duplicate that
volume and pitch.

As an alternative, he responded with a whistle and click of his own. The
monsters did not make any more noises. Instead, they huddled close to
each other.

Ryo gave a mental shrug and pushed himself into a cor­ner. He lay on his
left side, watching them. It was dark outside now. The monsters still
cradled their energy rifles, and they watched him intently.

It suddenly occurred to him that /they /might be afraid of him. That was
a ludicrous thought. They were twice his size, twice his number, and
heavily armed. The only thing he had in his defense was the fact that
they were strangers on his world.

I suppose that's frightening enough, he thought sadly. Poor monsters. I
mean you no harm, and I hope you can feel the same about me.

One of them closed both eyes and he wondered what it might be like to
have eyelids. The creature was going to sleep, and it was another relief
to learn they had that in common. The taller one remained conscious,
watching Ryo.

Watch all you wish, he thought. I am going to sleep myself. He let his
vision dim, his thoughts weaken. He was very tired.

He was so tired the dim realization did not rouse him. I thought their
smell was half familiar, he thought exhaust­edly to himself. Now I
remember what it reminds me of.

The aliens smelled very much like the yaryinfs ... Thranx?eaters.


  Chapter Nine

 

Search parties came close the following day but did not find them. By
the third day Ryo and the monsters were so deep into the forest Ryo
doubted anyone ever would.

Occasionally, search aircraft would slowly pass over­head. At such times
the monsters concealed themselves and their hostage beneath tree roots
or overhanging rocks. Once they even buried themselves into the clith,
which badly strained the temporary truce between monster and Thranx
because the thought of immersing himself in that numbing cold was nearly
too much for Ryo to bear. They settled for his remaining motionless
against a small rock, trusting to his pelt to camouflage him.

The next day one of the monsters demonstrated its fa­miliarity with the
energy rifle by using it to kill a small emlib. The furry herbivore
jerked once and was still. Ryo watched with interest as the creature
drew a small Thranx knife from a pocket and neatly butchered the
carcass, which was then roasted over an open, largely smokeless fire.

The larger monster offered a piece to Ryo. While he nor­mally would have
disdained so uncivilized a meal, he knew that if he didn't eat hunger
would kill him before the cold did. He accepted the meat, holding it
under the head of his pelt as he bit off small chunks with his mandibles
and swallowed them whole. Some vegetables would have helped, mixed
together with the meat in a proper stew, but he was thankful enough for
just the protein.

It was comparatively warm that night. The next day, they crossed ground
that was mostly devoid of clith. As they walked Ryo was startled when
one of the monsters suddenly began to whistle. There was rhythm but no
sense to the sounds. It was very similar to the crude speech of a newly
hatched larva.

Perhaps it was simply their mode. He tried imitating the sound, managed
to match it almost perfectly the first time. It was simple compared to
the monsters' more common communications noises.

The monsters looked pleased and whistled back at him. At that point Ryo
wondered if the researchers who'd stud­ied these creatures had
concentrated only on trying to learn their guttural language instead of
trying to teach them Thranx. If so, they probably tried to use
electromechanical interpreters. And for various reasons the monsters
might not have been interested in cooperating with the study.

Stopping, he pointed importantly to the nearest bush. "Slen," he
whistled. He gestured again, adding movement indicative of third?degree
importance. "Slen." He repeated it several times, much slower than
normal, drawing out the whistle comically.

The monsters hesitated. The larger seemed to argue with the smaller.
That was only Ryo's impression. For all he knew they might have begun a
mating ritual.

Turning to Ryo, the smaller monster hesitated a moment longer, then
formed its pair of flexible mandibles into a circular opening. The sight
was so disgusting Ryo had to force himself to watch.

But it produced a fine whistle. "Men," it said, also pointing at the bush.

"No, no," he said. "Try again." He touched the bush. "Slen."

"Zh ... slen," it said.

Ryo again touched the bush, said "slen," and added the movement for
affirmation. The monster repeated the word, but left off the gesture.

At that point Ryo glimpsed part of the trouble and was further amazed.
These creatures spoke only with their lungs! They apparently never
utilized their whole bodies.

Without thinking, excitement completely overwhelming normal caution, he
walked up to the monster and took hold of one of its upper limbs. Both
reacted sharply, but the smaller one did not pull away. Ryo pointed to
the bush, said "slen," and made the affirmation gesture again.

This time, after the monster repeated the word, Ryo moved its limb in
the gesture of affirmation. The limb moved freely, but the feel of it
made him a little ill. He fought to retain his composure. If the
researchers studying these creatures had thought to try the same thing
it would not have surprised him to learn that the larger monster had
thrown its inquisitor into the nearest wall.

Sometimes physical contact means more than mental, he mused. Fal had
told him that. It was an important rule to remember while teaching larvae.

He let go of the arm, stood back, and made the click sound signifying
"do you understand?" The monster stared at him. He repeated the sound.

The monster slowly made the gesture for "yes," then pointed at the bush
and whistled "slen." He was about to try the word for clith when the
larger monster, which had been watching intently while keeping the
muzzle of the ri­fle pointed at Ryo, suddenly walked over and touched
the bush. It looked at Ryo, made a gargling sound, then pointed at Ryo
and used some part of its internal mouth?parts to click, "Do you
understand?"

Ryo was so overjoyed he almost forgot to make the ges­ture of
affirmation. Then he said "slen" and tried to imi­tate the monster's own
mouth noise.

At that point the monsters made a whole series of very loud mouth noises
accompanied by a great deal of mutual touching.

The whistles, he knew, were produced by forcing air past those soft
mandibles. It took him a while and the pa­tience of the smaller monster
to discover how they produced their clicks. These sounds were softer
than his own. Instead of grinding mandibles together as Thranx did, the
monsters apparently utilized their peculiar mouth appendages against the
upper parts of their jaws. The resultant words were sloppily executed
but, if one paid attention, quite comprehensible.

The point of communication which had eluded them the longest, that of
gesturing and posture, turned out to be the simplest for them to
duplicate, once they began to under­stand that civilized speech was more
than merely a matter of atmospheric modulation.

By the fifth day Ryo was imitating some of the mon­sters' terms fairly
well. As they marched they all engaged in an orgy of identification,
beginning with the bush and working up to more complex terminology.
Trouble was had with certain gestures because the monsters were short
the correct number of limbs. They solved this by using one of their legs
as an arm or sitting down to use all four limbs if a quadruple
complicated movement was required.

By midmonth they were carrying on crude conversations. By the end of the
month and yet another meal of carbonized emlib Ryo was convinced the
authorities had given both him and the monsters up for dead.

The monsters were not members of different species, which was one
thought he'd given some credence to. Like the Thranx their kind had two
sexes, but the larger turned out to be a male, the smaller a female. Ryo
readily ac­cepted this mild perversion of the natural order. They were
not, however, a mated pair, but simply members of the same ship's crew.
Their name sounds were "loo" and "bon­nie." They did not have clan or
hive names, only personal and family. Ryo allowed them the unusual
familiarity of calling him by his personal name alone, since his full
name verged on the unpronounceable for them.

He learned that their skin color and slight difference of eye shape were
due to internal racial variations. Other things he already knew by
observation, such as the fact that they were omnivorous.

"Our ship," the larger monster Loo was explaining one day, "hurt by
other ship." The term hurt required a double click. Ryo took personal
pride in the monster's tolerable pronunciation.

"What different ... other, ship?"

The monster stopped. In damp mud he sketched the out­line with one
digit. Ryo recognized it immediately. It only confirmed earlier thoughts.

"AAnn ship," he said. As he repeated the word he picked up a rock and
threw it forcefully at the drawing, sending mud splattering. That was
one gesture that did not require elaboration.

"Bad. Not good," the monster agreed, making a gesture of fifth?degree
and maximum affirmation. Clumsy and un­subtle, Ryo thought, but a least
they are learning how to get their thoughts across. The monster emitted
a long, rip­pling whistle. "Very bad."

At least we have one thing in common, Ryo mused. Nei­ther of us has any
love for the AAnn. These creatures were not allies of the Thranx's
hereditary enemies.

"Why we imprisoned?" the monster suddenly asked.

Ryo thought, constructed a simple reply. "My people afraid you
AAnn?friends."

The monster made a funny noise that Ryo had not learned how to
translate. He asked for an explanation.

"Funny. Very funny."

So that was monster laughter, Ryo thought. Most peculiar. "Understand."
He then demonstrated the gestures and whistles for first? through
fifth?degree amusement. "No like AAnn, my people," he said. "My people
afraid you and AAnn friends."

The smaller monster said, "Funny. We afraid you Thranx people and AAnn
friends. Very funny."

"Big mistake," Ryo agreed.

"Very big mistake," the larger monster agreed. "All you Thranx people
afraid of us people when capture us. Why afraid? Because afraid we
AAnn?friends?"

"Partially," Ryo said. That required further explanation. Understanding
was coming quicker to both sides now. "Also another reason."

"What reason other?" the monster asked.

" `Other reason,"' Ryo corrected it?no, him, he re­minded himself. He
hesitated, then decided that if they were offended there wasn't much he
could do. It would have to be brought out sooner or later.

"My people, the Thranx, certain type." He tapped the chiton of his
thorax, then a leg, then his head. "On this world, on other my people
Thranx worlds, many creatures like you." He pointed to each of them in
turn. "Such crea­tures eat Thranx."

It took them a moment to digest this. Ryo had learned to recognize some
of their emotions, which were transmitted not by distinctive gestures
but by certain positioning of their flexible face parts. He saw that
instead of being angry they were confused.

The she?monster said, "On our worlds, my people afraid of creatures like
you Thranx people, only much smaller."

"Eat your people?" Ryo wondered.

"Not people. Eat our people food. For long time. Very long time. History."

"Mine also, all history fear of your creature kind."

They walked on in silence. After a while he thought it safe to continue.
He touched his antennae with a truhand. "Other things, too. You people
smell not good."

The smaller monster made the gesture of apology, with­out adding degree.

"Not your fault," said Ryo.

"You," she replied, "smell not like little Thranx kind all history
trouble our people. You smell very good." She halted, drew in the mud.
Ryo did not recognize the species, but the flower outline was
unmistakable. "Like that."

"Your color also," the he?monster added. "Very pretty."

"Thank you," he replied. "Your colors not so pretty but not so bad as
your smell."

"Your feel ..." The smaller monster reached out slowly. Ryo flinched,
forced himself to hold his ground. He'd touched them while demonstrating
proper gestures, but neither of them had touched him since Loo had*
*clamped five massive fingers around Ryo's mandibles.

"Just want to touch," Bonnie said.

Feeling like a museum exhibit, Ryo stood motionless while the monster
ran its fingers under the byorlesnath fur and along his body.

"My turn now," he said.

The monster opened its clothing, exposing itself to the air. The sight
made Ryo shudder, and he had to remind himself of the creature's
extraordinary tolerance for cold. He ran a delicate truhand along the
exposed surface, won­dering how closely their bodily divisions and
internal or­gans would match up. Too much botany, he told himself, and
not enough zoology. Though alien design would not necessarily conform to
similar Willow?wane shapes, he re­minded himself.

The most remarkable thing about the body was its flexi­bility. He
pressed in lightly. The monster did not complain or pull away.
Fascinated, he watched the tip of his finger sink into the flesh. When
he pulled his hand away the cov­ering sprang back.

Such a reaction was normal for plastics and artificial fibers. On the
exterior of a living creature it was stomach ­turning. He pressed again,
a little firmer. The exoderm changed color slightly. He could even see
bodily fluids moving beneath it. Utterly remarkable, he thought. The
more so when one realized that the beings inhabiting that thin envelope
were intelligent.

"Strange, so strange," he murmured. "Skeleton inside, flesh outside."

"We find you same," Bonnie said. "Skeleton outside, flesh inside. Very
different."

"Yes," he agreed, "very different."

The monsters ate three times a day instead of twice. As they were
finishing their odd midday meal Ryo thought to ask a question that had
been lost in the excitement of mu­tual education.

"Where are you going? What are you going to do?"

They looked at each other. "I do not know, Ryo," Loo said. "We thought
you were those who had attacked our ship. We thought you enemies. We
were treated like pris­oners."

"Remember," Ryo reminded them, "my people think you are allies of the
AAnn. How then should they treat you but as enemies?"

"But we're not," Bonnie said. "Especially if you tell truth when you say
it was AAnn who attacked our ship."

The challenge to his veracity was cause for combat. He calmed himself.
Remember, he told himself, these crea­tures have but primitive notions
of courtesy and common etiquette. They will for some time be as clumsy
in their perceptions as they are in their speech.

"Big mistake," he said. "Cosmic mistake. You must do something. Out
here," and he gestured at the surrounding forest, "you will die." He did
not include himself in that prediction. It was self?evident.

"Better to die here," Loo said roughly, "than in captiv­ity, poked and
prodded at like an exhibit in a zoo."

"No need for that," Ryo said encouragingly. "Silly mis­take. Silliness
in proportion to size. We must go back. I can explain everything. I can
interpret for you. When mistake explained by me, will be clear to all.
We will be friends, allies. Not enemies."

"I don't know ..." Loo made a gesture of third?degree indecision. "The
way we were treated ..."

"Were you killed? Are you dead?"

"No, we're not dead. We've been reasonably well fed." He made a face
gesture of mild disgust.

"More mistakes. Must return and explain all mistakes." Ryo implored them
with gestures. "Trust me. I will explain everything."

"We would wander this place forever to keep our free­dom," Loo told him.

"Not a logical end of itself," Ryo countered. "Also an­other factor."
Maybe, he thought, it wasn't self?evident. "I ... my
people?Thranx?cannot tolerate long cold weather." He'd felt his
circulation slowing the past several nights. "I will surely die. Will
you kill me to preserve your freedom, which has no logical end of
itself?" There, he thought as he leaned back against the log. There is
the real test. Now he would learn just how civilized they were.

"Most of what you say is truth," Bonnie declared fi­nally. "We would not
like to be responsible for your death. We have been careful not to kill.
Yet. You have been friend. There are misunderstandings here, on both
sides." She looked up at Loo and for a moment Ryo thought they might
also be telepathic.

"Friend speaks truth," she restated. "We'll go back with you."

"Next problem," said Loo. "Can we find our way back?"

"I think so." Ryo gestured skyward. "In any case, if we make our
presence known when a search ship flies over, we will be found."

 

The hoverer set down nearby. There was a tense con­frontation between
Ryo and a group of net? and stinger­wielding soldiers. Disbelief gave
way grudgingly to guarded astonishment. The two monsters were conducted
to the base under watchful eyes instead of netting. There they
de­scended via a heavily sealed entryway to a section Ryo had visited
before. The gestures of complete amazement per­formed by the officer
who'd previously refused him ad­mittance were lively to behold.

Torplublasmet was not present to greet him, having been questioned and
allowed to return to his burrow, but Wuu was. "My boy." He spoke while
looking past Ryo at the two monsters towering nearby. "I'd given you up
days ago. I've been asked many questions, which I answered sorrow­fully
and freely. How we came to be here, and why. But you appear whole and
healthy. I thought they would have consumed you by now."

"Not at all. That would have been impolite, and these are civilized
creatures. They can't help their appearance. Their ship was attacked by
the AAnn. They thought we were responsible.

"If we can overcome the unfortunate beginning our re­spective species
have managed to make, they may prove to be strong allies. There has been
mutual misunderstanding of colossal proportions."

"What are you saying, Ryo?" Loo asked.

Wuu and the other Thranx looked properly shocked. "By the central
burrow, they can talk!"

"Sometimes situation and precedent can combine to blunt, rather than
facilitate communication," Ryo ex­plained smoothly. He looked up at Loo.
"This friend of mine," and he pronounced the alien name, "is a he, the
other a she." He then gestured at Wuuzelansem, gave his name, and tried
to explain what a poet was.

The monsters soon deciphered the gestures and clicks. Then they shocked
the assembled researchers, guards, and Wuu alike by simultaneously
gesturing at the poet with a movement indicative of third?degree respect
mixed with mild admiration.

"They may be monsters," Wuu decided, "but they dis­play an unarguable
ability to recognize higher intelligence when it is presented to them."

"Come, let's go in," Bonnie said to Ryo. "We want you to meet our
companions."

Ryo followed, Wuu hanging back just a trifle. The guards hesitated but
the Thranx scientists and researchers in the group gestured them aside.

The party passed through several corridors, the monsters having to bend
to clear the ceilings. Eventually they en­tered a large chamber. The
saddles inside appeared unused, for obvious reasons of physiology.

Six monster males and four females lay alone or in small groups on the
floor. To Ryo's untrained eye, half of them looked damaged.

As he watched, the aliens suddenly recognized Loo and Bonnie. A great
deal of noise and physical contact resulted. Alien greetings, he
explained to the enraptured scientists, who stood clustered in the open
doorway, recorders run­ning at maximum speed.

When the greetings were concluded, Loo and Bonnie turned to Ryo. "Well,
it was good to be outside for a while, anyway," said Loo.

Ryo responded with a gesture of mild negativity. "Good to be back
/inside." /He added a whistling laugh while the two monsters made their
own laughter noises. It was difficult to tell who was more
flabbergasted; the Thranx scien­tists or the other monsters in the chamber.

"Different preferences," Bonnie said, running a hand through her cranial
fur.

"Yes," Ryo agreed. He gestured past her. "How are your friends?"

"Pleased to see us alive," Loo said. "Disappointed that we could not do
more. I explained to them that we now have a friend. This they
understood, for a friend can often be worth more than freedom."

"I am sure it will be so," Ryo replied confidently. "I will explain all
to these authorities." He indicated the rows of busy Tbranx crowded
around them. "This mistake will be straightened out soonest. There is
much to do between our peoples."

"Yes," Bonnie said. "There is nothing like a mutual en­emy," and she
made the gesture for the AAnn, "to produce understanding among potential
friends."

One of the officials was gesturing urgently to Ryo. He turned back to
his friends. "They want to talk to me now and I am equally anxious to
talk with them. Will you be well?"

"Well enough," Loo replied.

"Then all is calm for now. I will return as soon as I am able. Burrow
deep and warm." He inclined his head slightly and extended his antennae.

"Be warm," Bonnie said, reaching out to touch the tips of the delicate
organs.

Several of the Thranx guards turned away or otherwise indicated their
disgust. Of sterner stuff, the researchers and scientists simply
recorded the exchange with cool de­tachment. Then Ryo turned and joined
Wuu and the little cluster of specialists gathering around him. The two
aliens rejoined their own companions, who crowded excitedly around them.

Ryo was escorted to a nearby chamber and promptly sat down in a
comfortably padded saddle. The scientists who'd packed in around him
immediately threw a barrage of questions at him.

"What was it like? ... What did they do out there? What did they do to
you out there? ... How did you learn the language so quickly? ... How
did they learn

ours so quickly? ... How did they avoid the search par­ties for so long?
... How? ... Why? ... When? ..."

"Slowly, gentlesirs. I will?" He paused, suddenly dizzy.

Wuu stepped close. "Leave the youth alone for now. Can't you sense his
exhaustion? Doubtless he is weak from hunger as well."

Ryo looked gratefully up at the poet, made a third­degree gesture of
assent. "I am far from starving, though it would be wonderful to have a
good soup. I've had little but meat and raw greens for a month."

"Then they are omnivorous like us?" one scientist in­quired anxiously.
"It seemed thus because they ate much of what we supplied them, but it
is helpful to have it con­firmed by nonlaboratory experience."

"I said, no questions," Wuu broke in firmly.

But Ryo gestured his confirmation. "Yes, though they take their meat
largely in burnt chunks and not in proper soup or stew."

There was muttering among the assembled researchers at this fresh
assurance of alien oddity.

"They don't boil it or cook it with any other liquids?"

"Not that I saw."

"But they eat soups and stews here," another pointed out.

"It may not have been by choice," Ryo told her. "When one is in prison,
?one eats what is supplied." There, let them ponder that one, he thought.

After a few additional questions Wuu began to shove of­ficials from the
chamber. A hot meal was delivered that was among the finest Ryo had ever
enjoyed. Upon devour­ing it he had a second and then a third serving.
Following that he lay down on the sleeping lounge provided, the warm
feeling induced by the food overpowering his excite­ment, and fell into
a deep sleep from which he did not awaken for over a full day.


  Chapter Ten

 

After rising and performing hygiene he was ready to face his
interrogators. Ap­parently someone had decided that it would be better
not to swamp the unfortunate wanderer with a hundred questioners at
once, so only a half­ dozen assembled opposite Ryo in the discussion
chamber. Each brought audio and video recorder units integrated with
autoscrolls. Two were not much older than he, while the other four were
clearly experienced elders. Wuu was present at his own insistence.

"It's not necessary," Ryo had argued. "I can handle things."

"If not for me you wouldn't be here," the poet had re­plied. "I feel it
my responsibility to see that you are not intimidated."

"If not for me, you wouldn't be here."

"I have acquired sufficient material to keep me compos­ing for the
remainder of my life," Wuu declared. "Such heady rhythms and couplets
and stanzas as have never been heard. They will shock the civilized
worlds. I owe you that. Time enough to work later." He gestured toward
the saddled group. "These sirs and ladies wait patiently, yet their
brains fester with curiosity." A couple shifted uneasily at the poet's
words but waited their turn. "I would not let them wake you."

"For which I am very grateful," Ryo admitted. "I am awake and ready now,
so let them ask what they will."

Ryo accepted the questions slowly, sharing his knowl­edge of the aliens
freely and imparting it with as much pleasure as the scientists seemed
to feel in receiving it.

"The business of communication came about almost ac­cidentally," he
informed them. "Furthermore, if you use lungs, mandibles, and spicules
carefully, you can duplicate their language quite well." He demonstrated
with a few words that he was especially good at, and was rewarded when a
couple of the researchers who'd been inscribing in­formation suddenly
looked up as startled as if one of the aliens had just strode into the room.

"Do that again," one of them requested.

They listened while Ryo repeated the phrase and added several others.
"It is difficult, but by no means impossible," he said. "They do seem,
however, better able to master our language than we theirs. Yet I
venture to say it can be done. I've no doubt an experienced linguist
such as your­self," and he gestured at the Thranx who'd asked him to
repeat the sounds, "could do far better."

"Let me try." The researcher listened. On his second at­tempt he made
the noise comprehensible. It had taken Ryo many more attempts than two
to voice the term that clearly, but communication was the elder's
specialty. He should have thrown away his machines.

The others had to break in or the discussion would have quickly been
monopolized by an impromptu language les­son.

"Pressure of circumstances," the elder commented. "Foolish of us not to
realize it."

"They are mammalian," said one of the younger scien­tists, whose name
was Repleangel. "We've already estab­lished that. However, they are
almost completely bare of fur. Most extraordinary."

"We thought at first," one of the other scientists said, "that it might
be due to a seasonal variation."

"I don't think so," Ryo said. "I saw no evidence for it. Devoid of fur
or not, their ability to withstand extreme cold is unarguable."

"From our point of view, not necessarily theirs," said Rep.

"They were always cold, but never dangerously so," Ryo continued. "I
often saw them remove portions of their ex­tensive clothing to expose
their naked, furless bodies to the air while they cleaned themselves. I
would guess that the climate they would consider ideal must average some
ten to twenty degrees cooler than our own. Furthermore, they seem to
have no need whatsoever for moisture in the air. They must therefore
find the environment you have pro­duced in their room both overly hot
and humid."

"Are you certain of this lack of need for humidity?"

"All I can say is that in this polar region my lungs would have cracked
without the moisture pack I wore. The mon­sters had no such device and
seemed to thrive. I still shud­der to think of their breathing that
untreated air. I venture to say they could even survive on the worlds of
the AAnn, which are notoriously dry if pleasantly warm. That is an­other
factor which makes them valuable allies."

As he said the last his gaze went sideways to the sixth questioner. So
far the military representative had asked nothing. He did not react
visibly to Ryo's last comment any more than he bad to any of the
previous ones. He simply sat in his saddle and monitored his instruments.

Ryo let it pass. At least the thought had been planted.

The questions went on and on. "How many sexes do they have?"

"Two, like us."

"Male and female?"

"Yes."

"Do they lay eggs or bear their young alive?"

"I have no idea. That wasn't a question that entered into general
conversation."

"Do they have sexual taboos?"

"Your line of questioning strikes me as peculiar, elder."

"They cook their meat by burning it over an open fire?"

"Their cooking facilities were restricted. Maybe they re­quire the
additional carbon. Or it might be purely a ritual thing. I never asked."

"Is their vision comparable to ours? They utilize only those two simple
single?lensed eyes."

"It seems to be. They can see much farther, I think, but not as well up
close or in the dark."

Then came the voice of the military observer, speaking for the first
time, in a soft whistle. "They took energy ri­fles from two of the guards."

"Something I meant to ask," Ryo said quickly. "Was any­one injured
during their escape?"

"Injured, yes, but fortunately not killed. As you've no­ticed, they are
physically more massive than we. Their bal­ance is unexpectedly good."

"Yes, I noticed that right away," Ryo admitted.

"They are not as vulnerable to a severe blow as we are," the military
elder went on, "but they are far more suscepti­ble to damage from cuts
and scrapes. Their thin exoderm is incredibly fragile. However, if it is
torn it heals far more rapidly than a chiton break. There are pluses and
minuses to such a structure."

"Beauty is not one of the pluses," commented one of the two younger
scientists, adding a gesture of third?degree disgust.

"The two guards," the tenth?level officer continued, "were merely
stunned during the escape, when their rifles were taken. The planning
was admirable. They set off two explosions?"

"We heard them both," Wuu said.

"They were set to create a diversion. This was accom­plished. Those who
misinterpreted the situation have al­ready been disciplined. The
creatures took, as I said, two energy rifles, yet did not use them." He
shifted in his sad­dle, putting a little urgency into his tone. "You
said you observed them in use?"

"Yes," Ryo replied. "I'm sure they studied the weapons around them
before settling on the rifles. Despite having only two arms and hands,
they seemed to manage quite well. I have no doubt that had the
circumstances required it, they could have employed them against
soldiers as effi­ciently as they did against game."

The officer did not seem surprised at this, simply en­tered it into his
recorder. "Did they talk at all about their home world or about their
vessels?"

"Nothing about their planet of origin save that it was colder than
Hivehom seemed to be. Little about their ship except that the principles
behind its method of propulsion seemed similar to ours. Neither of them
is an engineer."

"Anything about weapons, military strength, or pos­ture?"

Ryo had been waiting for that question from the time the officer had
taken his saddle. Nevertheless, he was sur­prised at the resentment he
felt when it was finally asked.

"Nothing whatsoever. They are explorers. Their sole concern and
principal subject of conversation was survival. Military matters were
not mentioned."

The officer mumbled something half audible. "... couldn't expect much
..." Then louder, "For your own information, we found nothing during our
study of their ship to hint they are especially advanced militarily.
What we have been able to glean of their social structure indicates they
are not, for example, organized in a paramilitary society like the AAnn."

"I could have told you that," Ryo said confidently.

"However, they display certain worrisome characteristics of both social
and individual temperament."

"I don't understand, elder." Ryo was uncertain how to interpret the
officer's last statement. "I've already told you that they thought we
were the ones who'd attacked them. They are more than ready?I would even
say anxious?to form an alliance with us against the AAnn. This despite
unfortunate differences of shape. They find us only slightly less
disconcerting physically than we find them."

"That is difficult to believe," the second young re­searcher murmured.

One of the elders scolded him. "That is not a scientific attitude, Drin."

"I know it's not, but I cannot so easily wipe out thou­sands of years of
mental conditioning. They are mammals, no matter how similar their minds
might be. Soft of exte­rior and flexible of form. My insides turn
whenever I have to look at them." He swiveled to eye Ryo.

"I understand you actually engaged in physical contact with them, even
to the point of extending formal farewells."

"They are not at all that repulsive," Ryo insisted. "It's merely a
matter of seeing them as people. As I've men­tioned, they feel the same
way about the tiny arthropods on their own worlds. We are each the stuff
of the other's nightmares. These are primitive attitudes that both races
must fight to overcome. There is no logic to them."

"All of which I understand," Drin admitted without of­fense. "Still,
thousands of years of nightmare ... We are professionals here, used to
dealing with the incredible and outre." He surveyed his colleagues. "How
do you think the populace will react to the existence of these beings?
And if what you say is true," he said to Ryo, "these monsters will have
similar problems on their own world of Earth."

"Odd," one of the elders commented, "that they should name their home
planet after the ground when in fact they live above it, exposed to the
open sky?or so you tell us." He turned to Ryo.

"There are many such fascinations awaiting us," Ryo told her
confidently, "as soon as formal contact is opened." The words of the
officer returned to haunt him. "You said certain characteristics worried
you. What characteristics?"

Silence reigned in the chamber. Ryo studied his ques­tioners curiously.
"They are allies, you know. Or will be soon."

More silence. Several of the scientists looked away. The others did not.

"We can never let them leave here, of course," one of the elders said
finally. "Surely you realize that."

"I do not. That's absurd. How do we open negotiations with them if they
are not allowed to return home to begin discussions and make
introductions.?"

"There will be no introductions," the military observer remarked
quietly. "Not for a long time. Not with this group."

"But ... these are the people who can make us so strong the AAnn will
not dare prowl among our colonies. Their presence here is indication
enough they are a tech­nologically advanced race."

"Of that we never had the least doubt," the officer in­formed him. "That
is one of the things that troubles us."

/"You have /to let them go. It's indecent to keep impris­oned those
who've done you no harm. I've talked with them?two of them, anyway. I
know them. They are ready to be friends."

"So they have told you," said the elders. "Are you a qual­ified
xenopsych then, that you can positively interpret their motives?"

"They were telling me the truth." Ryo struggled to con­tain his anger
and frustration. What was wrong with these elders? At least two of them
wore the black star of Eint. Did that stand for nothing here? "They had
no reason to lie to me."

"No reason by your reasoning, perhaps, but what of their own?"

"I spent quarter months with them, in a difficult sur­vival situation.
Once communication was opened they were no more than cautious toward me.
There was no continuing hostility. After a while there was honest
friendship. So much so that they allowed me to persuade them to return."

"We are aware of that," Drin said, "and very grateful to you for doing
so. Not only was their escape scientifically disruptive, but had you
somehow made your way south into more populated regions, your companions
could have precipitated a panic."

"I still don't see what you're all so afraid of."

"We've had a chance to study them for some time, in a closed
environment," the elder spokesman said. "The re­sults," he hesitated
significantly, "do not hold out much promise for interspecies cooperation."

The military observer was more direct. "When they were first settled
here and placed under continuous observation, it was immediately evident
their social relationships are­ well, disturbing."

"What would you expect," Ryo argued. "They thought you were the ones
who'd attacked their ship."

The officer made a gesture of denial. "We treated them kindly, realizing
they might not be allies of the AAnn. It was their reaction to one
another that was so unexpected, not their reaction toward us." His tone
filled with remem­bered amazement.

"They fought among themselves. It's still hard to believe. Here they
were, twelve aliens trapped by possibly hostile creatures, yet their
anger was vented not so much toward us as each other. Though we could
not understand their language, battering a companion into
unconsciousness can only be interpreted in one way.

"One actually damaged a companion so badly that it re­quired medical
treatment. When that was provided their attitude toward us softened
visibly, but they continued to act in an unrelentingly hostile manner
toward one another.

"It is the opinion of the behavioral psychs who have had them under
surveillance that their actions suggest a racial paranoia of heretofore
unimagined dimensions. Compared to these creatures, the AAnn are models
of harmonious cooperation. Do we really want to ally ourselves closely
with such a race?"

"But they showed no such tendencies with me," Ryo said, bewildered.

"It is a fact that certain mammals act far differently in clusters than
they do when isolated," Drin said somberly. "They are rather like
subcritical fission masses?harmless when kept apart, explosive when
brought together. We do not know what the mental `critical mass' of
these creatures might be, but I would not like to be around when it is
reached."

"It is the considered opinion of the xenospsych staff that the entire
race may be collectively psychotic," the elder spokesman said.

"There may be other explanations," Ryo protested. "The pressure they've
been under as prisoners, their confinement underground when they prefer
the surface ..."

Drin was making a gesture of negativity. "We've allowed for that. The
signs are still there."

"You see now," the officer said gently, "why we cannot possibly let them
go. They now know the location of Hivehom. These are a sophisticated,
space?traversing folk. This group is composed of specialists in
exploration. Surely some of them would be able to find their way back
here. We cannot possibly let so dangerous and volatile a race return
home knowing the location of our mother world while we know nothing of
theirs. They destroyed all their records and charts during the AAnn
attack, you see. Further evidence of their paranoia."

"No more so than you've just admitted to," Ryo noted.

"Perhaps." The officer was not offended.

"But I tell you, gentlesirs, that I /know /these people."

"You know two of them," Drin pointed out. "That is hardly sufficient
evidence by which to classify an entire race."

"Maybe not. I'm no statistician. But I know true friend­ship when it is
offered to me, and I have received that from two of these beings. I can
probably gain the confi­dence of the rest of them if you'll give me some
freedom with them."

"I would hope so," the elder spokesman said. "We ear­nestly desire your
help, Ryozenzuzex. Your companion," and he indicated Wuu, "has explained
your history."

"Better to provide voluntarily what will become known anyway," the poet
said. Ryo saw no reason to argue that.

"We can notify your family and clan," the elder contin­ued. "It will be
explained that you are working on a gov­ernment project of great
importance. No lies will be told. We will merely exercise judicious
concealment. They should be quite satisfied. Meanwhile, you will be
given as free an antenna as possible to work among these creatures."

"Then why not let me tell them they can return home?" Ryo wondered.

"I am interested in a species of carnivore called the pro­dubia," one of
the elders said. "It lives in the jungles of Colophon. While I am
fascinated by its eating habits I have no desire to explore its method
of digestion from the inside. We will remain friendly with these
creatures, but cau­tious."

"I would rather," the military observer interrupted, "risk the loss of a
potential new ally than expose Hivehom to the attentions of a race that
cannot even control its most primi­tive instincts."

Ryo's initial reaction to these comments was barely con­trolled fury.
This gave way gradually to rationalization. The attitude of the
government, as represented by the six questioners in the chamber, was
dreadfully wrongheaded. But there was nothing he, Ryo, could do about
it. The al­iens would never be allowed to leave.

That would mean that the Thranx would not gain the benefits of
interspecies cooperation. Neither would the monsters. As to the business
about their being subject to racial paranoia and homicidal tendencies,
he simply re­fused to believe it. The xenopsychs were misinterpreting
their data. Machines again, he thought bitterly. Statistics.

No readout would ever convince him that the time he'd spent in the
wilderness with Bonnie and Loo had been filled with deceiving data. But
for now all he could do was be patient and try to make friends with
their associates.

"Yes, I'll help you. It's my duty, of course."

"We knew that would be your reaction." The elder spokesman was most
gratified as he checked his chronome­ter. "I had not realized we'd been
so long. We do not wish to strain you."

"I am fine," Ryo admitted honestly.

"No. Enough for now," one of the other elders said. "We can reconvene
tomorrow."

"I need to meet the other monsters," Ryo said.

"Of course. As soon as you wish," Drin told him. "Quar­ters have been
prepared for you. You will have all the assistance you need. I envy you.
I too would like to be able to study these creatures and interact with
them at first hand. For now, however, we have to rely on you to interpret."

Not only because I can communicate with them so well, but because I'm
the only one they trust, Ryo thought bit­terly.

That evening, Wuu discovered him resting on his sleep­ing lounge in
front of a viewer. The poet had been working hard and had filled nearly
a whole chip with prepoetry. His pleasure was dampened by something in
Ryo's atti­tude. He'd come to know the young agronomist quite well
during their travels and he was concerned about him. He'd been subjected
to unusual pressures for one of barely mid­age and those pressures would
intensify in the months to come.

"Greetings, Wuu." Ryo looked over as he switched off the viewer. "How is
your composing coming?"

"Extraordinarily well. The guild will be well pleased. And what of you,
my young friend? I worry about you. You have been thrown into a
situation few are prepared to cope with."

"I seem to thrive on it," Ryo replied, "although at first contact I
think I reacted much as a larva would."

The poet slid onto a saddle opposite the lounge and sighed deeply, the
air whistling out his spicules in a long gasp. "I will remain if you
wish me to, although they have no need of me here."

"I would like that. I need someone familiar nearby, for a while, at least."

"That is understandable. These scientists are a little bet­ter than
bureaucrats, but not much. I suppose the nature of their positions does
not encourage individualistic thought."

"It certainly doesn't," Ryo agreed. "For example, anyone with a modicum
of hive sense would see that we have to let these people return to their
home world so that formal ex­changes between us may begin. Don't you agree?"

The old poet stared back at him. "Certainly not, and it's about time you
started purging your own head of such ad­dled notions. They are the
major reason I worry about you."

For a moment Ryo simply could not reply. "But ... these will become our
allies, our friends against the AAnn."

"Did you not hear the findings of the researchers, the opinion of that
officer?" Wuu asked. "As an individualist, I can empathize somewhat with
these creatures. Naturally they would like to return home. I would want
the same were I in their position, I would also understand our
position." He leaned out of the saddle and added a gesture of
fourth?degree emphasis. "The safety of our entire race is at stake here,
Ryo. These are a powerful and dangerous people."

"I'm sure the AAnn will think so."

"Are you such a master diplomat?" Wuu snapped. "Are you then completely
confident they would ally themselves with us because of a single
incident involving one ship and its crew?"

"There is always some risk in such a situation," Ryo ad­mitted, "but it
must be chanced. We cannot hide ourselves from them forever. Eventually
contact will be established. If we take the initiative now we can avoid
a potentially disastrous misunderstanding. Future contacts might not
be­gin so auspiciously.

"And what of the AAnn? They are as masterful at diplo­macy as they are
at slaughter. What if they were to realize their error in attacking this
first ship and contact these people before us and instead of attacking
them again, forge an alliance with them against us? What would be our
posi­tion then?"

"All unlikely and all a problem for the future," Wuu replied, though it
was obvious the scenario Ryo presented concerned him. "For all we know
they may lie on the other side of the galaxy and we may never encounter
them again. The universe, my boy, is vast."

"If, as the military observer says, their ship's propulsive system is
not very different from ours then they cannot dwell very far, in
interstellar terms, from Hivehom."

"We know nothing of their life spans," the poet pointed out. "Indeed, we
still know little about them. That ignorance is yet another reason why
we cannot let them leave."

"Such a position is morally indefensible," Ryo insisted.

"I beg to differ with you, my earnest young friend. It is eminently
defensible, from a moral as well as military standpoint. You would feel
differently if you had seen them fighting among themselves, much as our
distant ancestors used to do. A group of Thranx placed in a similar
position would be mutually supportive and calm, not hys­terical and
violently combative." He made a gesture of disbelief. "It is quite
unbelievable. They possess dominant­internal traits they are not even
aware of. Such ritualized combat is a part of their basic nature. How
could we possi­bly be allies? Mentally as well as physically we are
nothing alike."

"Don't you see," Ryo argued, "doesn't anyone see that that is precisely
what makes such a union worthwhile? The differences would complement
each other. What is there to be gained from mating with someone exactly
like yourself? There is never anything new, never any surprises."

"Surprises are delightful," the poet agreed, "in art and music.
Surprises are wonderful ,in science. When the des­tiny and survival of
your entire race are at stake, I am not so sure that surprise is
welcome. Even were what you say to be so, what of their psychoses?"

"Every race has its distinctive problems," Ryo admitted. "We are not
perfect, either."

"No, but neither are we inherently homicidal, as these creatures appear
to be. While they might act quite sanely as individuals or even in small
groups, it is en masse that we would deal with them through treaties.
There is simply too much at stake to take such a chance.

"Besides, I disagree with you when you say they have something
worthwhile to offer us. From what I have seen, an alliance between us
would work largely to their advan­tage. They are a clumsy, primitive
people whose technolog­ical achievements have outstripped their moral
evolution."

"They are being treated as prisoners, looked upon by many with disgust.
That is hardly an atmosphere conducive to cultural understanding," Ryo
argued. "They must have all sorts of things to offer us, from the arts
through the sci­ences. This in addition to military alliance against the
AAnn."

"I am sorry, my boy. The only thing I've noticed about them that has
made much of an impression on me so far is their violence and their
smell, both of which I believe we could survive without. I am surprised
you cannot see this."

"Perhaps?perhaps you're right. Perhaps I've been de­luding myself. The
days out there in the clith ..."

"The strain is quite understandable," Wuu said sympa­thetically. "You
have nothing to apologize for."

"I guess you're right. Surely all the specialists cannot be wrong. I
need ... just some time. The excitement of the moment of contact, of
mutual supportiveness out there ..."

"I know it is discouraging, but this is the time for calm consideration
of all the facts, not just those you may have been exposed to
personally, my boy. You were not alone in your thinking, by the way.
Many of the scientific study group favored expanding contact with these
people. But at the last, when time came to make the actual decision,
they too realized it was better to err on the side of caution.
En­thusiasm always gives way under the assault of reason and good judgment.

"You have come a long way from the fields of Paszex. It must be
discouraging to see the adventure come to an end, but eventually
youthful enthusiasms must give way to real­ity. The reality is that such
contact is not regarded as advantageous by the majority of elders here.
I am pleased you have matured sufficiently to realize the truth of this."

"What you say about my enthusiasm is undeniably true," Ryo quietly
confessed. He sighed and his thorax pulsed. "At least I will be
permitted to remain to study these fasci­nating creatures further."

"It is not a question of permission, as you well know. The authorities
actively solicit your assistance. It is con­ceivable that had you not
agreed to do so, they might have invoked security edicts to keep you
here. Your experiences are unique, as is your relationship with the
monsters.

"At least you will have one non government friend here while I remain,
though flexible and ingratiating as you are, I've no doubt you will soon
have many friends among the staff."

"It will be comforting to know you are around," Ryo told him. "Such
discussion as we have just concluded is exhilarating as well as
enlightening."

"For me as well. More material for the massive volume I intend to
compile that will detail our entire journey. An arduous work, but one
which I look forward to completing. It will be a monument."

They continued the discussion, arguing animatedly and enjoyably, as they
made their way down the corridors. Their rooms were located close to the
large chamber where the aliens were being kept.

As Ryo learned more of the layout of what was called X Section he was
able to see how the authorities had managed to conceal the aliens. The
xenology section was completely independent of the main installation. It
had its own supply and power facilities, its own staff, even its own
entrances and exits.

Only three narrow corridors connected it with the rest of the base,
which had been built as part of the planetary defense system. Those
Thranx who staffed the latter pre­pared for an attack that they hoped
would never come, blissfully ignorant of the sensitive research being
carried out close at hand.

Ryo relaxed in the hygienic corner of his comparatively luxurious
quarters and cleaned himself with the damp scented cloth.

Wuu had immediately accepted Ryo's conversion to the majority opinion.
The old poet was clever, even brilliant, but his brilliance did not make
him a master of deception. Ryo was certain others were assigned to watch
him.

Poor Wuu, he thought. A composer of the Eint order. For all his
imagination and abilities he could see no further than his own
specialty. Wuu was a poet, and a masterful one. He was also an elder
whose thinking had become as pre­dictable as the midseason rains.
Petrification of the imagina­tion seemed to have infected everyone of
any authority. Ryo was coming to believe he was the only one able to
spark a new thought, a fresh idea.

That was only natural. That had been his talent since larvahood. Yes,
/that's /my profession, he thought excitedly. /That's /what I was
intended to do?to initiate newness, to break convention. All this time,
all these years, he'd subli­mated his real profession by breaking jungle
ground, when the topography he should have been attacking was that of
conventional wisdom.

If Wuu was convinced Ryo had come around to the ac­cepted way of
thinking, then there was no reason to sup­pose the staff scientists
would think otherwise. But Ryo would still have to be patient, would
have to bide his time. He smiled inwardly. I've done that before. This
time, how­ever, the unknown territory I have to cross is somewhat
greater then the distance between Paszex and Daret.

This time he would also not be fleeing by himself.


  Chapter Eleven

 

Arranging a private conversation with Loo and Bonnie was less difficult
than/ /he'd imagined. When the monsters 'understood what was wanted they
simply organized a group singalong. The rest of the monsters generated
suf­ficient noise to drown out the most sensitive directional pickup. In
addition, the new phenomenon of collective sound kept the fascinated
researchers busy at their instru­mentation. The volume was much greater
than an equal number of Thranx could have produced.

"This is a tremendous burden you've taken on yourself," Loo told Ryo
softly. "You're going against the considered opinion of all your superiors."

"They're not my superiors."

"Your elders then," Bonnie said. She looked away from him, a gesture
he'd learned indicated general uncertainty of approximately the third
degree. "It may be; Ryo, that they are correct. I realize I'm hurting
our own cause by saying that, but this is not the time for
prevarication. Throughout human history, we've often questioned our own
motives for fighting among ourselves. Many times we cannot come up with
satisfactory explanations for what we ,do. It may be that, as your
psychtechs insist, we are inher­ently homicidal."

"Then this alliance will be of more benefit to you than you can
imagine," Ryo told her. "We Thranx are not very excitable. We are very
good at reasoning things through and seeing to the heart of
misunderstandings. Perhaps what you've always needed are friends who
will not fight with you, but who are ever available to explain and to
soothe."

"Perhaps." She looked back at him. "I do know one thing. Regardless of
what our governments decide to do, we three have consummated our own
little alliance." She reached out a hand to touch one of Ryo's truhands.

He grasped it firmly, having learned the significance of the gesture
many days ago. There was considerably more power in her fingers than in
his, though with a foothand he could have matched her grip. She was
careful not to bruise the more delicate upper digits.

"Our ship," Loo whispered, "is still functioning. It's in a synchronous
orbit above us right now."

"How do you know that?" Ryo asked, a little startled.

"Because while Bonnie and I were free, they ferried some of our friends
to it to answer questions about design and function. Certain queries
were answered. Others were not. There was no coercion."

"Naturally not." Ryo was upset at the very thought.

"Our people are different," Loo murmured. "Anyway, our shipmates report
no dismantling of components. Not yet, anyway. We'd nearly completed
repair of the damage the AAnn had done t® the drive when your own
explora­tion ship stumbled into us. Our engineers are confident they can
finish the few repairs 'remaining in sufficiently short time to make an
escape feasible."

"How are we to reach your ship? I'm an agricultural expert. I know
nothing of astrophysical matters."

"But that's not a problem!" Bonnie told him excitedly. "They wanted to
study our mechanics and design with ad­vanced diagnostic equipment, so
they induced Alexis and Elvira," she pointed to two of the wailing
monsters; "to bring one of our shuttles down. It's right here, in the base."

"Separate hangar," Ryo muttered, "to conceal it from the general personnel."

"Our friends argued about it. Eventually Alexis agreed because they
threatened to take the shuttle apart inside our ship. Getting to the
shuttle will be the problem. I'm sure it must be under heavy guard."

"Not necessarily."

Loo made the frown gesture with his rubbery mouth­parts. "I don't
understand. Why wouldn't it be?"

"What reason is there to guard a shuttle? There is only need to guard
its pilots. You are here, the ship is elsewhere. Keeping you apart is
security enough. No Thranx, of course, would think of assisting a bunch
of monsters."

"Thanks," Loo said drily. "Except you, of course."

"And I am possibly mad. By helping you, I will become something of a
monster to my own people." He paused reflectively, added in a different
tone, "You realize, of course, that if there is no resultant alliance,
that if friend­ship does not materialize between our races, then I will
be effectively dead."

Neither of them said anything.

"Excuse me," he said apologetically. "That was impolite. Those are not
thoughts to be inflicted on others. This is my own free decision.
Nothing compels me to do this.

"I demand only one thing in return for my assistance. That if our escape
should be opposed, under no circum­stances will you or any of your
hivemates kill to facilitate it.

They looked uncomfortable. "We can promise for our­selves," Bonnie
agreed, "but I don't know about the others. If we're close to making it
back to the /Seeker, /I'm not sure one or two would not hesitate to use
any method to insure our successful boarding."

"Precisely such traits," Ryo noted solemnly, "have con­vinced Thranx
scientists that it would be unwise to expand contact between us. You
must impress this on your com­panions. Opinion is still uncertain among
some members of the research staff. Killing would forever solidify the
feel­ings against you and would make further contact impossi­ble."

"We'll do our best," Loo assured him. "We'll try and convince the others."

"Who is clanmother among you?" He made a quick ges­ture of
embarrassment. "I am sorry. I forgot. You have nei­ther clan nor hive
organization. You go from family to some sort of loose tribal
federation. It must make you feel very alone sometimes. I think that may
be part of your problem."

"Maybe we are loners compared to the Thranx," Loo said, "but I think we
have more individual freedom. Your own experiences are proof of that."

"From this undisciplined freedom comes perhaps your tendencies to?but
enough philosophy." He was concerned that their long conversation might
attract the attention of the hidden researchers.

"I shall try to divine the location of your shuttlecraft, ascertain the
difficulties involved in reaching it, and decide on a propitious time to
attempt an escape. Since your first successful attempt, security
measures have been strength­ened, I am told. You are all closely and
constantly watched. It will be more difficult this time."

"That's only to be expected," Loo noted, "but we didn't have an ally
working for us outside before, either."

"Very true." A strange feeling rippled through Ryo, a combination of the
way both monsters had stared at him out of their vitreous single?lensed
eyes and the way Loo had pronounced the word "ally."

 

Days passed, stretched inexorably into months. Eventu­ally Ryo was
allowed to communicate freely with his fam­ily. From Fal to sire to
clanmates, all were pleased but puzzled. They'd been told that he was
engaged in very im­portant, serious work for the government. This had
been openly accepted.

For his part Ryo was pleased to learn that his initial perfidy in
ignoring family and clan directives had been put aside. All were content
to accept that he was doing useful work and that he would return home
when feasible.

As the days rolled on and the monsters were more tran­quil and
cooperative, the authorities relaxed their surveil­lance somewhat, but
not even Ryo's continued assurances that the monsters had come to terms
with their fate was enough to convince every member of the
observation?and­ study staff.

Most of the monsters could now speak some Thranx. A few Thranx were
struggling to acquire fluency in monster speech, though this was
deliberately and subtly discouraged on Loo and Bonnie's orders.

Ryo was given a formal position with the research team and the title of
assistant consultant. The income momentar­ily took his breath away. It
was considerably more than he accumulated as board member for the Inmot
Company's Paszex operations. He felt guilt at accepting such position
and compensation when he was spending most of his time planning to
contravene everything he was being paid to do, but he accepted it all
with apparent gratefulness.

A time carne when even Wuu was ready to return to Willow?wane. The old
poet assured Ryo that once his af­fairs were back to normal he would
take the time to travel to Paszex so he could meet with Ryo's family and
assure them of his good health in person.

In addition to his research work and mastering the hu­man language Ryo
also casually acquired a thorough knowl­edge of X Section and all
security measures. The monsters' shuttlecraft was located in a small
hangar nearby. It was subject to intense study by Thranx engineers.
Occasionally several closely guarded monsters would be allowed aboard to
explain design functions and Ryo would accompany them as interpreter.

During such visits security surrounding and on board the shuttle
quadrupled. Given such precautions, it took Ryo some time to formulate a
plan promising even a slight chance of success.

The fugitives would ignore the corridors save for one. Since Loo and
Bonnie's escape, everything larger than a water pipe was constantly
monitored. This time, all would flee quickly topside, then cross to
another exit and use it to reenter the base as close as possible to the
hangar. Ryo hoped the authorities wouldn't consider the possibility that
once outside, the aliens would then try to escape back in­/side./

It was difficult to be patient. Ryo's pleas for time were backed up by
the burrow master?"Captain"?of the al­iens, Elvira sanchez. She did not
talk much, but her words were listened to.

Eventually Fourth Season came to an end with the festival of Teirquelot,
a cause for celebration among the base personnel. At an outpost as
dreary as Sed?Clee, holidays were taken seriously.

Cannisters of sleep gas had been installed by security personnel around
the aliens' chamber, which precaution was intended to prevent any alien
rampage. Ryo planned to turn the security measure to his friends' advantage.

Many months had passed since Loo and Bonnie's escape. Relaxed security
combined with the holiday allowed Ryo to slip from room to room without
question. No one saw him readjust the cannister control valves, even
though several timeparts of nerve?racking activity were required to
com­plete the job. Now, when the cannisters were activated, they would
spew their soporific contents not into the mon­sters' quarters but into
the surrounding areas.

Only one corridor was to be left ungassed because it led to an emergency
escape ramp that ascended to the surface. Ryo worried some about the
aliens' tolerance, but the hu­mans assured him even Deep Cold would not
prevent their making the short run to the next exitway.

Using ventilation towers, Ryo had triangulated the position of the
hangar holding the monsters' shuttlecraft, then he selected the closest
exit port visible. Once inside again, their precise location would
determine their next moves. To his unpracticed eye, the exit port seemed
quite near to the shuttle hangar.

He would wait until the guard had been reduced to its minimum, which
would probably coincide with the height of celebration. The monsters
would feign sound sleep inside their chamber. Then, appropriately
masked, Ryo would cir­cle the surrounding rooms, opening the gas
cannisters everywhere except in the chosen corridor.

If standard procedure held, two guards would be sta­tioned in that
corridor, and Ryo would somehow have to neutralize them. It should be
easy, for they would not be expecting trouble. But it was still the part
of the plan that worried him most.

Once he'd bypassed the instruments that monitored the monsters' body
heat, oxygen consumption, and so forth, the escapees would race to the
ramp, shut down the warn­ing unit that would indicate it was in use,
exit, and run across the frozen landscape to the exit above the hangar.
There they would descend, overwhelm whatever guards might be present,
and power up their shuttle. The hangar doors would be programmed to open
and several minutes after entering the hangar they would lift clear.

At least, that was how the escape was envisioned. Ryo and his friends
studied it repeatedly, refining movements, trying to shorten the
necessary time. Whether the plan would work or not remained to be seen.
There could be no trial run.

 

It was a particularly dark and cold night. Ryo hurriedly retreated from
the observation post, though his presence did not surprise the
indifferent guard, who attended to his fiction chips and ignored the
consultant. Ryo's peculiar af­fection for the surface was well known
throughout X Sec­tion, confirmed by those who'd researched his past.

Omoick, the larger moon, was new and black. Oxnuick, the smaller, was
only half full. That should aid conceal­ment as they made the dangerous
run from one exit to the next.

He made his way back toward the study sector, occasion­ally greeting
cheery celebrants. Not all of them were drunk, but all were involved in
season?end celebration and little else. A quality that may not
facilitate intellectual ad­vancement, he mused, but one which both races
shared.

No one questioned Ryo's presence as he ambled from room to room checking
instrumentation. Most of the study chambers were empty. A few were
temporarily occupied. He waited in those until their inhabitants
departed, then quickly activated the altered cannister controls. The
sleep gas was odorless and colorless. If you knew it was present you had
seconds in which to flee. If not, you quietly suc­cumbed.

He did not have to use the small filter mask he carried in his vest
except once when he thought to check a room originally empty.

A young researcher was preparing a report on the con­jectured premating
nocturnal habits of the monsters. She was having a difficult time
because the aliens were not cooperating much in that area. Ryo watched
from the cor­ridor as she started to enter her observation room, halted,
swayed for an instant, then toppled onto her right side.

Retreating, he closed a corridor barrier, shoved several wads of
expanding plastic against it to insure a tight seal. He repeated this
with doorways on the opposite side of the corridor. Then he hurried
inward, steeling himself.

Only a single guard was, mounted where he'd expected two, but this
advantage was mitigated when the guard turned and recognized him.

"Good evening, Consultant."

"Good evening." Ryo fought to recall the guard's name. Time was ticking
away. "How are they behaving, Eush?"

"Quiet, as always." The guard held his energy rifle loosely as he looked
past Ryo. Was some half?gassed scien­tist staggering down the corridor
toward them, waving frantic alarm gestures at the guard?

The corridor was deserted save for the two of them. The guard was gazing
longingly, not specifically. "Sounds like everyone else is having a fine
time."

"An energetic celebration," Ryo agreed tensely.

"I wish I could join them."

"Why don't you? I've nothing to do this evening. This far from clan and
friends I don't feel much like celebrating.­ I'm qualified to assume
watch for you."

"That's very gracious of you." The guard wavered. "But it would be my
star for deserting my post. I couldn't possi­bly, not even on the
permission of one so highly regarded as yourself. I thank you, however,
for your generous of­fer."

"As you wish. A shame." He stepped past the guard. Just ahead lay the
monsters' holding chamber and the bar­rier with its multiple?sensor
lock's. Behind it, twelve mon­sters feigned sleep. They retained their
personal chronome­ters. Though their time markings and splits differed
from normal time, they had been able to coordinate them suffi­ciently
with Ryo's for them to be stirring uneasily by now.

"Those two lovely females waiting back there, for exam­ple," Ryo said
smoothly, "have accompanied me this far and are anxious for celebratory
companionship. See them whispering, the one with the turquoise chiton
and her com­panion of the gilded ovipositors?"

"Where?" The guard stepped cautiously to one side and tried hard to see
up the darkened corridor. "Perhaps they might join us here? Nothing was
said about my not cele­brating at my own post.

"Hello," he called out. "My name is Eushminyowot, friends of the
consultant!" He said nothing more because of the weighted cloth that Ryo
brought down hard against the back of his skull. The guard fell as
silently as those who'd inhaled the sleep gas. His chiton whacked
sharply on the hard floor.

"Rest and celebrate in your dreams," Ryo said. Then he hurried the last
steps down the passageway and ran the combination of the sensor locks.
For a few seconds nothing happened and he wondered frantically if
someone had changed the combination without notifying him. Then the door
slid slowly into the wall. Standing behind it were a dozen anxious aliens.

For just an instant the sight of their horribly flexible masks looming
over him in the dim light sent a stab of fear through Ryo. Then the
inherited fears faded as Loo and Elvira stepped out into the corridor,
bending low to clear the ceiling. A couple of the monsters exchanged
words when they saw the motionless body of the guard.

"Quickly now, we've no time to waste," Ryo said ur­gently.

"Lead the way. We'll be right behind you." The captain was tall even for
a human, Ryo noted.

As they emerged silently into the corridor, Ryo noticed the aliens had
armed themselves with pieces of furniture. He said nothing about this
because there was no time for arguing.

Ryo staggered slightly as they passed one of the door­ways he'd
hurriedly sealed. Sleep gas was seeping from be­hind it despite his
work. His head cleared as they rushed past. The monsters did not seem to
notice it at all. A much stronger dose was required to affect them.

Another couple of turns, up two levels, and They were at the emergency
exit. They met no one. Blessed be the celebrants, Ryo thought
gratefully, for they shall remain pure in spirit and devoid of knowledge.

It took him a minute to bypass the warning unit. He could only hope that
no backup alarm sounded a warning on the central security console as the
first was discon­nected.

The hatch flipped up and out. There was a soft flume as it landed on
accumulated clith. Then the party was on the eerie treeless surface that
roofed the base. In the distance the treeline was visible, its ghostly
ranks marching silently away in the half?light. Only a single shadow
marked his emergence. Clith crystals sparkled like gems in the light of
Omuick.

Ryo marked their position and pointed the way. The monsters said nothing
as they started for the correct exit marker. The hangar lay a modest
distance away.

They were perhaps halfway there when the obvious sud­denly intruded on
Ryo. They had prepared for so many things; speed of progress, the sleep
gas, the holiday night, the phases of the moons?he'd forgotten only one
thing. His cold?weather gear!

He slowed, the numbness already beginning to overcome him. "You go on,"
he told Bonnie and Loo as they hung back with him. "You know where the
hangar entrance is now and I've told you how to program the cover. I'll
wait here."

"Permanently? Not a chance, Consultant," Loo said.

"We need you, Ryo," Bonnie added.

The two massive creatures bent and lifted him between them; they ran
with an extraordinary jouncing motion, and he thought for certain he
would be sick. His body felt like a vibrating spring by the end of the
short run.

They set him down next to the hangar exit. Despite the increasing
numbness in his hands he managed to set the second bypass.

If the alarm had been raised it had not yet reached above ground. No
high?intensity lights swept the frozen surface in search of them. The
hatch cover clicked and flipped open. With the monsters flattened
against the ground and watching him, he started down.

The smaller hangar was dimly lit. Ryo paused at the bot­tom of the ramp
and let his dangerously chilled body soak up the warmth. When he was
comfortable again he moved forward and peered cautiously around the
opening at the end of the ramp. Nothing moved inside the hangar, but he
thought he could discern voices far away. They must be on the far side
of the hangar, he thought. That meant they could not see anything at
this end.

Ahead of him stretched ranks of planetary defense craft. The hangar was
a miniature of the vast cavern located in the main base. Armed
shuttlecraft were visible farther away. To his right, just beyond the
first of the aircraft, was a bulky, awkward shape that had to be the
monsters' shut­tle.

Hurrying back up the ramp, he confronted a circle of anxious alien faces.

"There are guards about, but so far away I can only hear them. Your
shuttle is close by. From what little I could see it seems intact."

"Be our luck," grumbled one of the monsters, "we'll get down safely, get
aboard and be all set to blow, and find out they've defueled the engines."

"Relax," Loo advised him. "You said they broke the chemical makeup of
the solid fuel components a month ago. They know the stuff's inert until
ignition. They've no reason to disassemble anything."

"I'm not talking about reason," the pessimistic monster continued, "I'm
talking about luck.. We're going to need both to get out of this."

"Let's move," Bonnie said sharply. She started down the ramp.

Ryo caught up and passed her, halted once more at the bottom. There was
still no one in sight, but he fretted be­cause the idle voices seemed
slightly louder. "I will go first," he announced. He noticed how tightly
the monsters were gripping their makeshift weapons. One carried Eush's
energy rifle. "And please, no violence."

"Did you tell that to the guard in the corridor," said the engineer
named Alexis, "before you clobbered him?"

"It was a careful blow, intended only to incapacitate, not to kill." His
tone was sharp, but the engineer was not offended.

Ryo stepped into the open and walked around the single aircraft. Up
close, the monsters' shuttle was clearly larger than a comparable Thranx
craft, but not unduly so. It fit with room to spare beneath the vaulting
ceiling of the hangar.

At first he could find nothing amiss. It was near the end of his check
that he discovered a large metal plate dangling from the vessel's stern.
Returning to the rampway, he re­lated what he'd seen.

"Sounds like they've been studying the coordinated feed and firing
controls," said Javier the engineer. She was a diminutive female not
much taller than Ryo.

"We'll just have to fix whatever's been tampered with," Elvira added
huskily. "Hopefully it's not serious. We've come this far." She eyed the
hangar opening hungrily. "We're not going back to that cage."

Murmurs of assent rose around her.

"I concur. We must take our chances now," Ryo agreed. He led them
silently onto the floor.

The boarding ramp was down. Most of the monsters started up but a few
technicians, led by Javier, hurried to­ward the stern where they began
working inside the open hatch.

Ryo nervously stood guard nearby. The voices came nearer still, then
began to fade again. After what seemed like an eternity a loud metallic
/click/ sounded from behind him. The monsters had finished their work
and were clos­ing up the hatch. Loo and Bonnie waited to greet them at
the base of the entry ramp.

"All set," Javier whispered softly. "It looked like they'd just been
testing. Nothing seemed out of place." She shrugged, another gesture Ryo
had come to recognize. The monsters were incorrect in stating they
communicated only with their voices. "We'll have to try it anyhow. We
don't have the time to run a detailed inspection."

"Right. Get aboard."

The three monsters climbed the ramp. Loo turned un­comfortably to Ryo.
"We don't know how to thank you. You know that. There's really nothing
appropriate any of us could say."

"You haven't even reached your ship yet and you're a long way from
jumping to Space Plus. It's premature to think of thanking me."

"No, even if this is as far as we get we owe you more than can be put in
the words of either language. We'll be standing by for the overheads to
open. Are you certain you won't be harmed? You told me it would take
them a while to determine for certain that it was you who reset the
sleep­gas cannisters, but that guard recognized you."

"It doesn't matter anyway," Ryo replied. "I'm coming with you. The
overhead doors have already been pro­grammed. I did that when I first
checked your ship for damage." He indicated a nearby computer terminal.
"There's no lock or guard on them. No one would expose himself to the
air here without orders."

Loo and Bonnie were momentarily speechless.

"Why should I not go with you?" He fought hard to con­tain his
excitement and his nervousness. "My entire life something has pushed me
onward, to seek extremes, to learn the unknown. It pushed me into
extending friendship to the both of you and then to your companions. It
has pushed me to commiting an act of Eint?denial. Why should I not carry
it to its next extreme as something inside is forcing me to do?"

"I don't know." Loo looked uncertainly at Bonnie. "'I don't have the
authority. I ..."

"Talk to your captain, Elvirasanchez. It will take only a moment. We
have no formal contract, but it might be said that you owe me this."

"I'm still not sure?"

A piercing whistle punctured the resulting silence. Single? and
multiple?lensed eyes turned. Three guards stood between an air?defense
ship and a shuttle. They were ges­turing frantically while whistling and
clicking at the top of their range.

Lights winked on inside the monsters' shuttlecraft, blinked several
times. A slow whine started from its stern. Somewhere a horn hooted
violently and confused whistles rose from all around the hangar.

No time remained for argument. Loo made a gesture Ryo did not recognize,
then shouted, "Come on! We'll argue about it later!"

Even as they hurried up the boarding ramp, it was start­ing to retract.
Inside, everything was confused and out of place to Ryo's eyes. Monsters
moved rapidly around him, through corridors far too high and narrow.
Everything seemed backward, distorted, an imager's nightmare vision of
what a real ship should look like.

He stayed close to Loo and Bonnie, afraid of losing him­self in that
distorted interior. Loo threw himself into one of the tiny saddles and
began exchanging complex words with another monster seated nearby.
Despite months of study the phrases' meaning eluded Ryo.

"They've just seen us," the other monster told Loo after concluding the
barrage of technical talk. "What about the hangar doors?"

"No timel" came the word from over the internal com­municator. Ryo
recognized the captain's tone.

Alien words flew around the chamber. "What's the bug doing here? ...
Wants to come with us ... What, but why? ... Wants to ... worry about it
later ... No time ... How do we get out of here? ... One way, hang on!
... Open and closed! ..." And other exclama­tions Ryo had neither the
wherewithal nor the time to translate.

Thunder rattled the shuttle and Ryo found himself thrown to the deck.
The sudden movement was not taken out of disregard for his safety,
several monsters were like­wise dumped on their abdomens.

Something under Ryo's feet went rhooom! and for a mo­ment every light in
the chamber went out. He fought to regain his balance. It sounded like
the ship had been hit. In fact, the opposite was true.

The guard in the fringe tower had reacted to the base ­wide alarm, but
no one had bothered to tell him what the alarm was about. He thought it
likely to be another drill.

This illusion was violently and unexpectedly dispelled by the geyser of
metal and plastic fragments that erupted from the far side of the base.
Without warning, a ship hung in the center of the falling shower of
splinters. It was big­ger than any shuttle he'd ever seen and showed
only two wings. A bright glow emanated from one end.

Then the roar reached him and that at least was famil­iar. The ship
jumped as if kicked, rising skyward at an extreme angle. So stunned and
enthralled was he by the sight that he forgot to activate his own alarm.
Sometimes it is not planning but inspired confusion that is the best aid
to escape.

The light of half a moon shining down on it, the /Seek­er's /shuttle
rapidly accelerated into the cold, cloudy night air of Hivehom.


  Chapter Twelve

 

There was nothing aboard like the ac­celeration saddles he'd lain in on
the shuttles that had lifted him from Willow?wane and dropped him down
to Hivehom. Human saddles were short and angled in on themselves. He
could not possibly straddle one.

The monsters were hastily strapping themselves into their own units
except for one who staggered forward. For­gotten, Ryo chose a place on
the deck where two walls joined and spread himself as flat as he could.
With foot­hands he grasped the support pylons of two monsters' sad­dles.

He worried overmuch. No radical maneuvers were per­formed and the steady
acceleration was not difficult to bear. Soon the shuttle was coasting in
free space.

That did present some problems. The monsters' shuttle­craft was not
large enough to retain artificial gravity, so Ryo went floating past
several of the securely strapped?in crew. Loo unbuckled his upper torso
and reached up to grab one of Ryo's flailing hind legs, then pulled him
down to where he could obtain a grip on the back of the mon­ster's
saddle with all four hands. From there he was able to, manage reasonably
well.

The voices of the pilots reached them via the communi­cators. Again Ryo
recognized that of the captain.

"I don't see a thing," she said. She paused, then, "There's nothing up
here. Not a damn thing, not even a shuttle."

"What about the /Seeker?" /an unseen questioner asked.

"Coming up on her." A longer pause, broken by a third voice.

"She looks untouched. I don't think they've tried taking her apart."

"Why should they?" Elvira responded. "For all they knew it could be
booby?trapped."

"I don't know," the second voice began. "They don't strike me as a
suspicious people. Though I don't see how they could be anything else
after years of sparring with the AAnn." A brief silence. "God, she's
beautiful. I never thought I'd call her that."

"I never thought you'd call anything that if it wasn't female," Elvira
responded. This was followed by human laughter.

I must begin thinking of them as "humans" and not as monsters, he told
himself firmly. Diplomacy must be done.

"Hey, I wonder if any of them are on board?"

"I don't know," the third voice commented. "We'll find out soon enough.
In any case, we've got our weapons sys­tem back now. I'm sure as hell
not going peacefully back to that hellhole. If they try and stop us
there'll be bug juice over half the stellar objects between here and
Centaurus space."

Ryo stiffened mentally, forced himself to shrug the com­ment off. The
speaker doubtless did not know Ryo was on board. Nevertheless the
viciousness in the human's state­ment unsettled him. He began to wonder
if he might not have overreached himself. Perhaps these creatures were
as duplicitous as the AAnn. Morally he was still confident he'd done the
right thing. However, there were a few con­cerns that overrode even
morality.

There was a dull thump. Hanging as he was, Ryo could not obtain a decent
view through one of the indecently rounded ports, but humans were
unstrapping themselves. Using guidelines, they pulled themselves toward
the rear airlock. With his four hands Ryo was able to maneuver on the
guidelines even better than his companions. Bonnie complimented him on
his agility.

"I've only been in space twice before," he told her as they pulled
themselves down the narrow, circular docking tube toward increasing
gravity and the alien mother ship, "but I've always been dexterous."

"I've often wished for an extra pair of hands," Loo re­marked from ahead
of them, "but I think I'd settle for a few more brains and a lot more luck."

"There is no such thing as luck, according to the philoso­phers," Ryo
replied. "They insist it is an outmoded mythological concept."

"We'll debate that one later," Bonnie said, interrupting them. "We're
still not out of it."

" `Out of it'?" Ryo murmured. "I misunderstand."

"Safely away. I don't think your presence on board would be enough to
prevent your government's attacking us if they decide on that course of
action, do you?"

"Most certainly not. The contrary might be true."

Then he was in the alien ship. The humans were vanishing to different
posts like so many mina?bugs. Someone called from a distance, "Detection
reports nobody on board. Not a guard in sight."

"Why should there be?" another, more distant voice yelled. "Who's going
to try and steal it? Besides, they haven't been able to figure out how
to run it yet."

The final checks Bonnie had spoken of took even less time than Ryo had
expected. Then all of a sudden he was standing in the corridor all by
himself. Loo and Bonnie had rushed to their stations. In the haste to
complete final re­pairs the crew of the /Seeker /had forgotten there was
an alien in their midst.

That was fine with Ryo. He strolled around the peculiar vessel
unchallenged, touching nothing because nothing was familiar. The
corridors were generally identical; high, narrow rectangles instead of
the comforting low triangles or arches. It was most disconcerting, as if
his whole world of perceptions had suddenly been squeezed from both sides.

Some of the chambers he inspected were evidently living quarters. Their
contents remained a mystery to him. All except a single item of
furniture that, save for being higher and longer, closely resembled a
proper lounge. He won­dered if they were intended for sleeping or some
as yet unknown function.

Since no one was around to stop him he tested one ­overly soft with a
slightly irritating mushy movement to its insides, but otherwise quite
suitable for resting. He had to haul himself onto it. Once there and as
soon as he got used to the rolling sensation, he succeeded in making
himself comfortable for the first time since they'd boarded.

 

"What do you think, Captain?" The cocontroller was studying the
activated screens that showed the green?white mass of Hivehom and the
space surrounding it. Several moons appeared as graphic representations,
as did moving points of light too large to be dust and too near to be
satel­lites.

"Ships," Sanchez noted tersely. "Have to be. Orbital. No, /there's /one
moving." She checked a readout, announced with satisfaction, "Moving
away from us. Standard com­mercial traffic. It squares with what the bug
told us. This is a busy world."

"His name is Ryo," Bonnie announced from the other side of the cabin.

"All right?it squares with what Ryo told us. This is their capital
world. Traffic's to be expected. I don't think we could mask ourselves
with it, though. Ship signature is too different."

"I'm sure they're marking us right now," said Taourit, the cocontroller.
"They've kept us well away from the other ships. Probably a restricted
area."

Sanchez nodded, spoke toward? her pickup. "Engineer­ing? Status?"

The speaker replied. "Engineering checks okay."

"Thanks, Alexis. We're set, then."

Bonnie leaned a little closer to one screen. "Lights com­ing up," she
declared. "Small mass, moving fast. Too small for a ship. Military
shuttle maybe."

"That was fast," Taourit murmured. "Somebody down there's good at
deduction."

"And so we bid farewell to the vacation world of Hive­hom," Sanchez
muttered. "Our stay was pleasant but over­long, I think. Let's get out
of here."

A slight vibration ran through the room and the /Seeker /began to move.
It was still too close to the world below for the Supralight drive to be
engaged. In normal space the tiny shuttle coming up behind would be just
as fast. For a while it seemed to be gaining.

Eventually the captain issued additional commands. Far out in front of
the ship a deep?purple glow appeared, the visual manifestation of the
immensely concentrated artifi­cial gravity field generated by the ship's
projectors.

The /Seeker /leaped outward. As it did so it pushed the growing field,
which pulled the ship, which pushed the field. Acceleration was rapid.
There was a moment of nau­sea and utter disorientation. The field and
the ship within passed the speed of light and entered the abstract
universe known as Space Plus. Stars went wavy and streaked around the ship.

Everyone was about to relax when Bonnie's screens dis­played three new
marks, behind and to one side of the /Seeker's /course through Space Plus.

The /Seeker's /computer went to work. Bonnie studied the resultant
readout, but did not try to conceal a sigh of relief. "Not a chance of
intercept?not unless they're a lot faster than we are. Of course, they
could track us all the way back to Centaurus, but I don't think they'll
risk that."

Still, one of the pursuing vessels continued to follow as, its
companions dropped from the screens.

"Maybe they think they're faster than we are."

Bonnie shook her head. "If anything, the reverse is true?unless they've
tried to fool us into thinking that."

"Anderson, you're a detection specialist, not a psycholo­gist," Taourit
observed.

"We all have our hobbies."

The computer interrupted to announce the result of stud­ies begun when
they'd reentered the ship. It declared that the air was breathable,
gravity was operational, and in general all was right within the
enclosed metal globe that was the /Seeker./

The single light on Bonnie's console continued to hold position as if
its crew was determined to follow all the way across the galaxy, if need
be. Twice it dropped from the screen, only to crawl slowly back into
view. Once it made up some distance on its quarry.

"What do you make of that?" Sanchez asked the cocon­troller.

Taourit studied the monitors and readouts, punched a query into the
computer, and received fresh information.

"They're fiddling with their drive. Probably pushing it to the limit."
He looked over at her. "It would be detrimental to future relations if
this bunch were to blow themselves up trying to catch us."

"We can't be held responsible for that," the captain re­plied calmly.
"We made no hostile gestures toward them and they still kept us
prisoners?would have kept us per­manently if we hadn't escaped,
according to this Ryo indi­vidual."

"Yes. According to it," agreed Taourit.

"It's a him," Bonnie reminded them.

They both turned to glance at her, then resumed their conversation.
"According to him, and exactly who is `him'? Could he be a cleverly
planted spy?" the cocontroller won­dered.

"I don't think so," Sanchez said. "Our escape clearly was not engineered
by them."

"You sure?" Taourit asked. "Maybe they felt they'd learned as much about
the ship and about us as they could." He gestured around the room. "Just
because every­thing's in place doesn't mean they mightn't have taken the
/Seeker /apart and put it back together again. I'd bet they could. Did
you notice those upper hands, the ones they call truhands? They can do
detail work finer than the best hu­man artisan.

"So why couldn't they also have engineered our escape? Not one of their
people was harmed. That could be due to surprise?or complete lack of it.
I don't think there's any surveillance equipment on board. Our
diagnostics would have found it by now and it could hardly report back
over interstellar distances, anyway. But they've got a better re­cording
instrument on board in this Ryo."

"Farfetched. How could he get his information back home?"

"I don't know, Captain. But then, there's quite a lot we don't know
about these bugs. Sure, it's farfetched?but not impossible."

"No, not impossible," she admitted.

"Maybe they were right," Bonnie put in from across the control room.

"Right about what?" Taourit asked.

"About our racial paranoia. Our history supports them about as much as
your current conversation."

"It's only a possibility that ought to be considered," San­chez argued.
But she did not resume the discussion with the cocontroller. The
implications of the detector's words were unpleasant.

They were twelve hours out and a good distance from Hivehom, and Alexis
Antonovich was exhausted. He had been glued to his drive monitors since
they'd retaken the /Seeker. /The ship was performing beautifully. The
repairs continued to hold and there wasn't a hint of oscillation in the
field. She shot through Space Plus snugly wrapped in her convoying
envelope of mathematical distortion. Now the engineer just wanted to rest.

He stopped in front of the door to his compartment, touched the switch
that slid it aside. Bleary?eyed, he moved to the wash basin. After
cleaning his face he felt much better. A glance in the mirror showed a
scraggly growth of beard that had acctzmrzlated can the bug wctrld.
Depilatory cream was one of many items they hadn't had time to bring
down from the orbiting /Seeker./

Something else was reflected in the mirror: a pair of bulbous, gleaming,
multicolored eyes stared at his reflec­tion. Whirling, he was confronted
by the Sight of a five­foot?long arthropod lying on its left side on his
bed. It held his pillow in one blue?green armored hand.

"Self?inspection," it commented in whispery but quite understandable
Terranglo. "That's interesting." It gestured with the pillow. "Perhaps
you can explain the function of this soft device to me?"

"It's called a pillow," Alexis responded automatically to the polite
question. "We rest our heads on it while we sleep."

"But why would you need something else to rest your head upon," the
Thranx inquired, examining the pillow closely, "when this lounge is
already too soft?"

"That's because?" Alexis broke off the reply, suddenly conscious of what
was happening. He moved quickly to the wall communicator, activated it,
and talked without taking his gaze from the creature on his bed.

"Captain, Alexis here. I just went off duty. I'm in my cabin. I think
perhaps there are some matters we have to clarify."

 

Despite Taourit's suspicions, Ryo was given the run of the ship. He was
full of questions that he knew sometimes irritated his human hosts, who
were concerned only with their own safe return. Though he was still
learning about facial expression, a radical new concept to a being with
an inflexible exoskeleton, he was convinced some of them looked at him
in a less than friendly manner. That dis­turbed him, but he told himself
firmly that it was only natural.

His first request for access to the /Seeker's /computer bank was turned
down. Only when the last, persistent Thranx ship finally faded from the
screens did the captain relent. Ryo could find nothing harmful without
special coding. The general files were more entertaining than dan­gerous
and Ryo's desire to learn more about his hosts seemed devoid of ulterior
motive.

He was also able to study the crew at their stations. of the twelve
surviving members of the /Seeker's /crew, at least four were openly,
even enthusiastically friendly?Loo and Bonnie, the engineer named
Alexis, and the ship's environ­mental monitor. Another six, including
Captain Elvira­sanchez, were politely neutral. Only two remained overtly
hostile, despite Sanchez's orders for them to act courteous in Ryo's
presence.

Their hostility troubled him. After several unsuccessful attempts to win
them over?one even became physically ill in his presence?he decided not,
to press the matter and simply avoided them whenever possible.

A study of human history revealed an antiarthropod bias exceeding the
hereditary Thranx fear of mammals and other soft?bodies. In addition to
groundless but very persis­tent phobias, actual events such as plague
and the massive destruction of food supplies lent support to such a bias.

Small arthropods such as insects sometimes ate Thranx food, but not to
the degree they had devastated human sup­plies throughout history. It
was not surprising, then, that in unguarded moments even Loo and Bonnie
looked at him with unconscious expressions of fear and disgust. It was
hard for them to overcome a lifetime's conditioning.

As it was for him. Their warm, smelly bodies pressed constantly around
him and he had to struggle to suppress his own instinctive reactions.

At least that was not a reciprocal problem. Even the two who actively
disliked him confessed that his natural odor resembled a cross between
lemon and lilacs, whatever they were. More than once he caught a crew
member inhaling with obvious pleasure in his presence. Their sense of
smell was located in twin openings located just above their mouths,
which struck Ryo as a particularly impractical ar­rangement.

How odd it would be, he thought amusedly, if under­standing should be
reached between our species not on the basis of mutual interests or
intellectual discourse, but be­cause one of us smells good to the other.

 

He spent the days in Space Plus devouring everything the computer would
feed him. Its controls were unnecessarily bulky and easy to manipulate.
His knowledge of monster­- of human language and customs increased.

The engineer Alexis had shown Ryo how to use the ter­minal in his
burrow. Then he moved in with a companion so his living quarters could
be given over to the Thranx. Since each burrow had individual climate
controls Ryo was able to alter temperature and humidity to suit his own
tem­perament. As the humans found the hot, sticky climate in the room
distinctly uncomfortable, he had a good deal of privacy in which to
pursue his studies.

Few visited him except for Loo and Bonnie and, after a while, the
captain. Sanchez did not warm to Ryo as they had, but her conversation
was always absorbing. Ryo knew she was in a difficult official position
because, as she saw it, the Thranx were the first intelligent race
mankind had en­countered and the circumstances under which contact had
been made were not covered by official procedure.

"No," he corrected her. "We're the second intelligent race you've
encountered." Ryo then gave her a complete rundown on the AAnn,
admitting from the first that it would be biased. The /Seeker's
/remaining science staff was brought in and they listened raptly to the
lecture.

The atmosphere on the /Seeker /was never completely re­laxed. No one
knew if her repairs would hold to the end of the journey. If the drive
were to fail, their sublight engines could still get them back to
Centaurus in a couple of hundred years or so. Her arrival would be of
interest, but not to the desiccated corpses crewing her. .

But the repairs continued to hold and the drive contin­ued to function.
The air grew foul and thin for several days, but that was as close as
internal elements came to a serious breakdown.

Activity intensified on the day designated for emergence into normal
space. The countdown commenced with no more than the usual tension, the
familiar wrenching sensa­tion was felt, several of the crew lost the
contents of their stomachs, and then it was done.

Ryo moved hurriedly to the main port in the ship's con­trol room. A
planet drifted below and, above it, a distant and to him very dim sun.
Though no astronomer, he thought the world beneath must be far too cold
and harsh to support life. Surely it was not their intended destination.

"You're right," the cocontroller informed him, without taking his eyes
from his instrumentation. "There are eight planets in this system, of
which the third and fifth have been colonized." He smiled. "Mistakenly,
too. The colonists who first arrived here thought they'd reached an
entirely different star."

"If this is not our destination, then why are we stopping here?"

"Standard precautions regulating returning exploration craft," Taourit
told him. He pointed to the port. "See that bright spot just ahead?
That's where we're going."

The orbital station circling Centaurus' seventh planet was an enormous
wheeled complex, mankind's farthest out­post. It impressed Ryo. The
world it circled was cold and dead.

A large and, Ryo thought, too well?armed cluster of hu­mans met him and
his companions when they emerged from the station airlock. They were
polite, but he could read emotions other than welcome in some of the faces.

The official who made the short speech and greeted him in a mildly
patronizing manner was courteous enough, however. Ryo was conducted to a
spacious burrow on the skin of the station. A sweeping port offered a
view of the stars and the icy globe rotating below.

The temperature and humidity had been set to his speci­fications, and
plants had been provided to give the burrow a homelike atmosphere.
Someone had gone to a great deal of effort to insure his comfort.

After the expected argument he was allowed a computer terminal, one
slightly more complicated than the one he'd used on the /Seeker. /The
engineer who instructed him in its use watched with more than a little
envy as Ryo utilized sixteen digits and four hands to input requests far
more rapidly than any human could have managed.

Days of conversation followed. As long as the station authorities
allowed him access to information, Ryo was reasonably happy. The
percentages of humans who openly liked him, were uncertain, or
unremittingly inimical re­mained about the same as on board the /Seeker.
/But his visitors were mostly scientists and researchers, he reminded
himself. He doubted he would be as well accepted among the general populace.

Occasionally he was visited by members of the /Seeker's /crew. They were
undergoing debriefing elsewhere on the station and did not try to
conceal their pleasure at once more being with their own kind.

Ryo's guests included one group of three that spent an inordinate amount
of time with him. There was one large elderly male and a /smaller
/elderly female who both sported white fur. The third member of this
team was a consider­ably younger male.

At the moment Ryo was stretched out flat on a saddle that the station
shop had hastily cobbled together for him. The alien fabric was gently
gripping against his abdomen and thorax, the head brace decently curved.
He crossed his hands over his front and let his legs droop lazily over
the sides of the saddle. In addition to the three scientists, Loo was
present, not to act as interpreter, since Ryo's mastery of the human
language was now extensive, but simply to be a familiar go?between
should the need arise.

After several hours of discussion concerning Thranx cul­tural habits,
Ryo had a question of his own.

"You know, I have an interesting proposal I would like to make. I've
given it a good deal of thought." He studied his visitors as they waited
for him to continue.

On the right was the elder male named Rijseen. Ryo had decided he was
the equivalent of an Eint, for he was often deferred to by other
inquirers. Next to him sat the elder female Kibwezi, whose skin was
nearly as dark as the space surrounding the station. Nearby was the
youngest of the three, the diminutive male called Bhadravati.

Since they'd first come to question him many changes had been made in
Ryo's burrow, at his request. The ceiling had been lowered nearly a
meter. A human of more than average height was therefore compelled to
stoop when walking. All the right angles had been removed through the
addition of sprayed polyfoam. The lighting had been re­duced. The heat
and humidity remained at Willow?wane normal.

By way of partial compensation a changing room had been installed
between the station corridor and the burrow proper. There visitors could
discard whatever clothing they wished so they might speak with their
alien guest in comparative comfort.

Despite the fact that he was sitting practically naked, the sweat was
pouring from Rijseen's face. His companions seemed more at home in the
tropical climate of Ryo's quarters.

The phenomenon of sweat fascinated Ryo, but he led his thoughts away
from it to the question he intended to ask. "During my studies I have
learned that there are regions on several of the worlds you have settled
which you make little or no use of. This includes your home world of Earth."

"You aren't supposed to know details like that," the younger man
interrupted sharply. Then he blinked as if he'd mentioned something /he
/wasn't supposed to. The woman threw him a look of reproach. It didn't
pass Ryo, who'd become adept at recognizing the meaning of such
flexings. He let out a short whistle of amusement.

"When a society becomes sufficiently advanced techno­logically it
becomes very hard to conceal something from someone who knows how to ask
the right questions. While we are considerably different in shape, our
information machines generally obey the same laws. Do not be sur­prised
that I have circumvented certain restraints. I do so out of curiosity,
not malice.

"On your Earth there are areas such as the Malay penin­sula, the Congo
region of the continent called Africa, and in particular the Amazon
basin that are to this day thinly inhabited and inefficiently utilized,
though you have made extensive efforts to exploit them."

"They're likely to remain that way," Kibwezi com­mented.

"That is not necessary. For example, you have left the Amazon basin
largely untouched because it was found some time ago that extensive
development of the region would result in catastrophic deforestation.
This would upset the production of oxygen and possibly unbalance your
atmosphere.

"We .are not only experienced at making use of such areas, we prefer to
live beneath them. The humidity and temperature would be like home to
me. We can tunnel through and live in almost any kind of ground, the
result of thousands of years of sophisticated excavating. Although it is
a little cool during certain seasons, my people could live quite
contentedly in such a place, which can be only for­ever inhospitable to
your kind." He hurried on.

"Lest you think me making a subtle suggestion of inva­sion, I must also
tell you that there are comparable regions on our own worlds that you
would find quite pleasant, though I would not live in them for all the
credit in the universe. Some of them are greater in proportion to their
planets' surface areas than this Amazon basin is to your Earth's.

"For example, the extreme polar regions of our capital world of Hivehom
are lethally cold to us, yet according to my studies no worse than much
of your northern hemi­sphere continents." He gestured at Loo. "Those who
were held there can attest to its climate during our coldest sea­son.

"There is also an extensive plateau that rises two thou­sand meters
above its surrounding country. Many of the trees you call softwoods
thrive up there. Rainfall is moder­ate by your standards and
temperatures too cool for Thranx comfort. There are no mineral resources
but the soil is suitable for the kinds of farming I have studied." A
little pride crept into his tone. "Of that I can promise you.

"I would guess that the climate there approximates what is average
around your Mediterranean Sea. So you see, we could greatly benefit each
other by trading off such territo­ries: Development of these regions
could proceed easily, since they are located not on new worlds but on
highly developed ones. All would benefit."

"We are hardly empowered?" Rijseen began apologeti­cally.

The female took over for him. "You must understand, Ryo, that we are
simply scientists, observers. We are here to study and learn and to
teach. We do not set policy, though we may make recommendations.

"I am not a bureaucrat, but I think I can say with confi­dence that your
proposal is more than simply premature. There has not been even
preliminary formal contact initi­ated between our species. Yet you sit
there and calmly pro­pose not a mere alliance or expression of
friendship, but an actual exchange of territory and colonists."

"Let me try and put it more graphically," the younger man said, "and
excuse me if I use terminology that seems indelicate. The idea of
perhaps a million of your own kind, a million giant, armor?plated,
glow?eyed bugs, actually set­tling down on Earth, is one that would be
very hard for its general population to accept."

"No more so," Ryo responded, having anticipated the objection, "than it
would be for the people of the Hive of Chitteranx, who dwell directly
below the plateau I told you of, to gaze every day up its cliffs knowing
that hundreds of thousands of giant, fleshy, flexible aliens were
building ma­chines and lives up there."

"Then you are as subject to the racial paranoia your psychtechs accused
us of as we may be," said Kibwezi.

"Not at all. We are discussing now deeply ingrained cul­tural fears and
ancestral emotions. You may loathe my appearance, my people may loathe
yours, but unlike you, we do not loathe each other's. We have not fought
among ourselves for thousands of years. Your history, which I have
studied, is full of devastating internal conflicts of appall­ingly
recent date."

"We're getting away from your proposal," Rijseen. Put in. "I don't see how?"

Ryo risked censure by interrupting, though, he reminded himself, that
did not carry the disapproval here that it would have among his own
people. "Think of the knowl­edge to be gained by both sides, the
advances that would surely be made, not to mention the necessity of
striking a military alliance against the AAnn."

"That may not be as vital as you seem to believe," Bhad­ravati noted.
"You insist it was an AAnn vessel that at­tacked the /Seeker, /but we
have no way of confirming that. You could be trying to smooth over a
mistake by your own government."

"The AAnn exist. They attacked your ship and killed your people and are
every bit as dangerous as I've told you.

"You've told us that these AAnn once attacked your own home town,"
Kibwezi said softly. "That they killed your friends and relatives."

"That is also truth."

"Then your own personal?not to mention racial?bias against the AAnn
would naturally induce you to seek an alliance against them. Even if
they did attack the /Seeker, /it may have been in error. They might, for
example, have thought it a new design of your own. Why should we ally
ourselves with you against them when we might befriends with them as
well as with the Thranx?"

"A neat trick," Ryo replied, controlling his temper. "There is one
difficulty. The AAnn believe they are a cho­sen species, designated to
rule the entire galaxy. Other, infe­rior races are to be exterminated or
enslaved. They are very patient and careful to conceal such feelings in
the pres­ence of diplomats. This patience makes them all the more
dangerous."

"So you say," Bhadravati responded.

Ryo's composure slipped just a little. "What reason would I have to lie
to you?"

"I just enumerated," began the woman, but Ryo hardly heard her now.

He had innocently thought his carefully prepared pro­posal would be
accepted instantly and approved. Its logic was unassailable. Instead, it
had been casually brushed aside as unworkable and premature. Another
aspect of hu­man behavior to be filed for later dissection.

"They might indeed offer you apologies and alliance," he told them.
"Deceit is their refined weapon, deception their most prized
characteristic. These attributes are sup­ported by an advanced
technology and militaristic society."

"So you say," the younger man repeated with infuriating self?assurance.

"We digress again," Rijseen pointed out. He tried to reestablish the
atmosphere of cordiality with which they'd begun the questioning.

"As you've heard, we are only researchers. We can only pass your
proposal along?as we do all information?to others better positioned to
act on it."

"You will do that for me?" Ryo asked.

"Of course. We are collectors of information, not inter­preters. Now
tell us again," he said eagerly, "about the higher implications of the
filian ceremony."

Ryo sighed inwardly, determined to raise the issue again and again at
future meetings until he received some kind of positive response.


  Chapter Thirteen

 

A quarter?month later Ryo had an informal visit from Bonnie and Loo.
Like the rest of the /Seeker's /crew, they were still sequestered at the
station, subject to medical as well as mental study. They were answering
nearly as many questions as was Ryo.

Neither human was as uncomfortable as Ryo's question­ers. They were more
accustomed to the climate of his bur­row. The low ceiling and rounded
corners did not trouble them at all. They had endured such surroundings
for months on Hivehom.

Conversation consisted largely of pleasantries and remi­niscences.
Eventually the matter that had troubled Ryo for some days could be
ignored no longer. He escorted them to the wall where his private
terminal had been installed.

Since the meeting with Rijseen and his two companions he'd found that
tighter blocks had been placed on certain channels of inquiry. Nothing
had been said about it and the computer had been programmed to be
evasive rather than specific, but he recognized the establishment of
channel locks.

He'd discovered the other almost on a whim, in a mo­ment of boredom. It
presented a challenge and he attacked it more for the entertainment it
offered than out of any desire or need to know its contents. They had
turned out to be something other than entertaining, however.

"I was working here several days ago," he explained to them, sliding
into the saddle, "trying to research your con­tacts with other life."

"I thought you were an agricultural specialist," Bonnie said, staring
over his shoulder as the screen ran informa­tion.

"So I am, but the question of other intelligences has in­trigued me
since larvahood. If it were not for that I doubt we three would ever
have met."

"That would have been a loss," Loo said with a smile.

"Yes." Ryo worked the keyboard with two hands. In ad­dition to the
central screen the two peripherals on its right promptly winked to life.
Patterns flashed across the glass. "It was while hunting for evidence of
such contacts that I stumbled into a block. I'm used to that now.
Normally I file their location and ignore them. That is the polite thing
to do, since your superiors evidently feel there is certain material I
should not have access to."

Both humans looked a little uncomfortable despite Ryo's admission that
such blocks did not bother him.

"We have no control over such matters," .Bonnie said finally.

"I am aware of that. I was not accusing you. This block, however,
tempted me to try to circumvent it, since it con­cealed information of
particular relevance to me. I have come to believe the block was placed
not specifically against me but to prevent general access by the
majority of the staff at this station.

"In my years as member of my Company's local council I have had ample
opportunity to make use of information­retrieval technology. Though your
system differs from ours, I have applied myself both on the /Seeker /and
while here, and have succeeded in learning a great deal. Also, Thranx
are naturally proficient at logic and aesthetic inference.

"Briefly then, I managed to bypass the block that had been placed on
this particular line of questioning. I was in fact surprised that a
stronger block had not been placed on it. Sometimes in their eagerness
to conceal vital informa­tion bureaucrats may overlook the trivial."

He returned to the console and his fingers moved across the keys. The
flow of information on the three screens slowed, stabilized. The words
MAXECRET?ALIEN CONTACT and THRANX appeared. Demand was made for a second
in­put, which Ryo supplied.

The words vanished, were replaced by a computer­ generated diagram of
Ryo's body. On the peripheral screens information began to unroll,
accompanied by smaller diagrams and appropriate commentary.

"That's your file!" Loo blurted in surprise.

"Indeed," Ryo replied. Behind him the two humans leaned closer.
Evidently neither had seen the information now appearing on the screens.

Ryo let it unspool at its own leisurely pace for a while, then touched a
control. The text and graphics became a multicolored blur on the
screens. A beep sounded from somewhere inside the console and the
information slowed to a near crawl.

"This is the section I would like you to pay attention to," he said
drily. "I found it mast interesting."

Bonnie's eyes traveled through the paragraphs, slowed at a particular
line. "... and it is therefore concluded, that additional questioning
beyond the prescribed date can gen­erate only minimal new information.
Urgent requests con­tinue outstanding from Xenophysiology and other
bureaus for further material on internal construction and in particu­lar
cerebral makeup and capability of the specimen in question."

Behind Ryo, Bonnie flinched at the last phrase. The in­formation
continued to roll up the screen.

"The military branches in particular are interested in all aspects of
the aforementioned with view toward future methodology for confusing
such functions as vision and feel. Particular inquiry is desired into
the physiology of the faz sense, which is not duplicated in humans and
which presents unique military difficulties of its own.

"It has therefore been decided by a vote of twelve to ten by the senior
planners of Project Thranx that, since the specimen in question appears
to occupy only a minimal status among his own hierarchy and that since
his where­abouts are in any case unknown to them, postmortem inter­nal
studies should commence on the date indicated.

"Psych Staff sees no problem in creating suitable excuse to explain the
specimen's demise should the need arise. This also supported by a vote
of 12?10 by the senior plan­ners.

"Note is made of the closeness of the decision and the vehemence of
those voting in opposition. Revote recon­firms the decision to proceed
with the aforementioned. Eu­thanasia will be performed the evening prior
to the an­nounced date and dissection and study will commence following.
Sig.Per.Proc. See tables MEDICAL, THRANX PROJ."

Fresh information continued to appear. Neither Bonnie nor Loo paid any
attention to it. Their single lenses seemed slightly glazed. While he
recognized the phenomenon, Ryo could not interpret it sufficiently to
correlate it with his companions' feelings.

"Did I not tell you it was most interesting?" he finally said into the
silence. "Apparently your superiors are so busy keeping knowledge of my
presence here unknown to the station personnel, they neglected to guard
it suffi­ciently from me."

"It's monstrous," Loo muttered. "They want to cut you up to see what
makes you tick."

"They have no grounds, no reason …" Bonnie began, so angry she could
hardly speak.

Ryo's reply was couched in philosophical tones. "There is no more
knowledge they feel they can gain from my aliveness, and much from my
death. I have already made my peace with eternity. I am prepared to
accept the inevi­table."

"It's not inevitable," Loo objected.

"Is it not?" Ryo turned the saddle and stared up at him. His ommatidia
sparkled in the light from the console. "Among my people such a
situation calls for resignation. I can sympathize with the desires of
your superiors. They wish only to further their knowledge."

"There are some things more important than furthering knowledge," Bonnie
countered.

"I would disagree with you, Bonnie."

"Don't," she?snapped. "You may be willing to go calmly to your death,
but I'll be damned if I'm willing to let you do it." Precipitation oozed
from the corners of her eyes, another human phenomenon Ryo found
fascinating. It was astonishing that any creature could generate
precipitation in so many different ways and for so many different rea­sons.

"What could you do?" Ryo murmured. "The decision has been made."

"Only on a local level," Loo noted. "The order could be countermanded by
higher scientific bodies on Earth. I'm sure that's why they've set the
date so soon, so they can commence their little vivisection party before
any response could be returned. Oh, they know what they're about, all
right. They're very clever." He seemed to slump in on him­self.

"We can bloody well go to the council and offer our own objections,"
Bonnie said.

"Yes, and you know how much weight they'll give to that."

"They have to listen to us," she objected. "Contact and follow?up is our
profession."

Loo was nodding. "They'll tell us we did a marvelous job. That our work
is finished. We'll all be promoted and given hugs bonuses." The irony in
his tone was clear even to Ryo.

"We've got to try." Loo's relentless reasoning had re­duced her initial
angry determination to a hopeful whisper.

"I cannot say that I do not wish you luck," Ryo admit­ted, adding a
gesture of mild amusement. "You did find the information interesting, as
I thought you would. Don't worry about me. I am content.

"I have learned that intelligence exists in yet another corner of this
stellar forest we call our galaxy. That is suf­ficient revelation to die
for. I shall return my component elements to Nature, with dissolution
already begun." The attempt at humor evidently failed; neither human
re­sponded as he'd hoped.

 

Something soft and pulpy was caressing his neck. The burrow was eerily
silent. At the same time his antennae twitched at the presence of a
malignant, musky odor close by.

He awoke with a start, terribly frightened, wondering where Fal was and
if the monster that was gazing down at him had already devoured her.

"Be quiet," urged the monster in a quiet, familiar voice. "I don't think
we've set off any alarms yet. There may not be any to set off. After
all, there's nowhere for you to escape to, is there?"

Slowly his sleepy mind cleared, recognized the frag­mented shape of
Bonnie standing over him. He lifted his head and looked past her.
Several other human silhouettes stood in his burrow. Others were
outlined by the light of the distant corridor, visible through the open
entryway.

"What's wrong?" he muttered. "What's the trouble?" He was still too
sleep?drenched to think in Terranglo.

Bonnie's Low Thranx answered him. "Some of us retain fragments of
civilization." Her tone was bitter. "We owe allegiance to standards not
incorporated in official man­uals."

"I believe I understand what you are saying." He slid off the lounge and
fumbled for his neck pouch and vest.

"What I am saying is that a good friend is not a candi­date for the
butcher block."

"It's not at all like that," Ryo protested. "As a question of scientific
expansion of knowledge?"

"As a question of scientific expansion of knowledge," she interrupted in
Terranglo, "it sucks. Have you got all your things?"

He closed the last snap on his neck pouch. "I think so."

"Then let's go." She started for the doorway. He fol­lowed
automatically, still drowsy and increasingly bewil­dered.

"Where are we going? This is not a planet. You cannot hide me on this
station for more than a short time."

"We have no intention of trying to hide you on the sta­tion."

They were out in the corridor. Ryo dimmed his percep­tion to compensate
for the bright human lighting. Loo was* *waiting for them, and
Elvirasanchez. With them were the cocontroller Taourit, the engineer
Alexis, and someone Ryo didn't recognize as a member of the /Seeker's
/crew. Six in all. Greetings were exchanged quietly and in haste.

"We're all committed to this," Sanchez informed him solemnly. "You
risked your life for something you believed in, believed in enough to
risk condemnation from your en­tire people. Well, there are a few of us
who are capable of equally strong beliefs."

"The shortsighted will always be among us," Ryo replied philosophically.
"Those who try to reach out with their minds are more often restrained
from behind than from ahead."

"I know." The captain gestured around her. "These are the only ones who
agreed."

"Will the others not betray you?"

Sanchez smiled. "They're convinced we're all talk and no action." She
looked past him. "I think you know Dr. Bhadravati."

Ryo turned, was surprised to find the young scientist who had questioned
him so many times. He had considered him the least friendly of the three
and confessed his aston­ishment at seeing him now.

"I'm not here because I think this is reasoningly or le­gally the right
thing to do," the young human said, "but morally I don't see how I can
do anything else. I believe that you are one of God's creatures, that
you have a soul, and that what they intend doing to you is wrong both in
the eyes of man and of God. I don't know if the term is one you've
learned, but prior to my matriculation as a xenolo­gist I was a theology
student. I draw support for these ac­tions tonight from the Bible, the
Rig?Veda, and the teach­ings of Buddha. What I do here now is part of my
journey down the noble Eightfold Path."

"I do not understand all of what you say," Ryo replied, "but I welcome
the result of your reasoning. I believe you would consider me a
Theravadist."

"That is impossible to reconcile with belief in?"

Sanchez stepped between them, spoke to Bhadravati. "You can try
converting him later. Our searches turned up no monitors, but sooner or
later someone's going to make a personal check of our guest's condition."

They hurried down the corridor. The station was big and the /Seeker /was
docked a considerable distance away. It was general sleeptime for the
humans.

I have done this before, on a more familiar world, Ryo mused suddenly.
It seems I am destined forever to be es­caping to someplace or from
somewhere.

They were running down a narrow service way where the light was subdued
and Ryo was grateful for the respite from the usual glare.

"That's far enough!"

The humans running ahead of Ryo came to a halt. He peered around
Sanchez. Blocking the corridor was a single human male. Ryo recognized
the object he was holding as a weapon. After a moment Ryo recognized the
figure. It was one of the /Seeker's /crew. One of the two who'd sneaked
hostile glances in Ryo's direction when he thought no one else was looking.

"Hello, Weldon," Sanchez said easily. "I bad a hunch you might have
suspected. You always were a sharp one."

"Shove it, Captain." Sweat was pouring down his cheeks and his thinning
hair was in disarray. "It wasn't hard to figure that you were planning
something. So I listened." He smiled, but there was no humor in it. "I
listen well."

"Okay, so you listen well. What are you going to do, turn us in?"

"I don't care what you do. I don't have anything against you, Captain.
Against any of you. You've been under a strain. We all have. It's
clouded your vision, but not mine. Not Renstaad's, either, but she isn't
up to this. Someone's got to do it."

"Do what?" Sanchez.

"What needs to be done. My God, don't you people real­ize what's
happened here? What these filthy creatures por­tend? We always knew it
might come, but not with such subtlety, not with such deviousness."

"What might come, Weldon?"

"The invasion, of course. All these centuries they've been watching us,
waiting. Now they've duped us into bringing one of 'em back with us.
He's the advance scout. Somehow he's even managed to hypnotize you all
into tak­ing him back. Back with the vital information they need.
Centaurus will be the first. After that, they'll probably go straight
for Earth itself."

"Weldon, you just said yourself we've all been under a strain. Ryo is-"

"Don't call it that!" he screamed. "Don't give it a name.

Things don't have names!"

"He's a friend. We're the ones threatening him, not the other way
around." She took a step toward him and the muzzle of the gun moved ever
so slightly to one side.

"Don't try it, Captain. I said I've got nothing against you, and I
don't, but by Heaven I'll shoot every one of you down to save the rest
of us if you force me to." His gaze, wild and fanatic, turned to the one
who'd been standing behind her.

"It will only take a second." His finger started to tighten on the
trigger. "Messier than a spray, but just as effec­tlve?"

"Don't do it, Weldon!" Loo stepped sideways, waving his hands. "We can!-“

The gun made a slight hissing sound. Something struck Loo in the chest
and knocked him backward. His arms, already disconnecting from his
brain, flopped loosely in the air. Bonnie screamed. Taourit pulled
something from his jacket pocket. Weldon turned to face him, brought his
pis­tol around as the dart from the little gun struck him in the
forehead. His eyes glazed instantly and his body went as rigid as if
he'd been frozen. He made a loud thump when his head hit the floor.

Bonnie was kneeling next to Loo. She was not crying. Alexis was pulling
at her.

"Come on. It's too late." He put a hand over the man's chest. There was
a very large hole in it. "It's too late, Bonnie." The others were
looking down at them.

Ryo touched his antennae to the back of Bonnie's neck. She jerked at the
airy caress, looked back at the sharp mandibles, the great faceted eyes.

"I am sorrowed, friend Bonnie. He was my friend too. The minute of
lastlife is gone and cannot be recaptured."

For a moment sanity left her gaze. Then reason and reality flooded back
in. "We're wasting time here." She stood, disdaining Alexis' offer of
assistance. "Let's not waste everything."

They started up the serviceway, stepping over the still rigid body of
the man named Weldon. No one stood guard over the airlock leading to the
/Seeker. /People did not steal Supralight?drive ships. It was almost
comically easy. No one was in a humorous mood, however.

The hatches were unsealed. For a second time the crew of the /Seeker
/prepared to flee with their ship. Only this time they were running not
from another people but from their own. How Wuu would love this
situation, Ryo mused, thinking fondly of the old poet and wishing he
were pres­ent to offer advice and companionship.

I had two equally fine human companions, he reminded himself. Only now
one of them is dead, because of me.

It was true there were no alarms to set off, no traps to trigger. But
when the /Seeker's /maneuvering engines were engaged and the umbilicals
connecting it to the station power system were jettisoned, portions of
the orbiting city's instrumentation came alive rapidly.

Ryo stood in the control room, watching his friends. Bonnie threw
herself into her work, becoming an emotion­less appendage of her
station. Dr. Bhadravati paced and fidgeted as if he did not know what to
do with his manipulating digits. Not being a member of the crew, he was
at that moment as useless as Ryo. Unlike Ryo, however, he was dying to
do /something./

From the first, there was nothing .ordinary about the in­quiries that
sounded over the console speakers. "You there, aboard DSR/ Seeker,
/acknowledge! You have disengaged and your engines are functioning. DSR/
Seeker /is not au­thorized to disengage. Who is aboard, please?
Acknowl­edge, DSR /Seeker!"/

"This is Captain Elvira Manuela de loa de Sanchez. I acknowledge for DSR
/Seeker. /Received and acknowledge orders to check out sublight engines
and life?support prior to boost to C?III for overhaul prior to next EX
flight. All okay here. Sorry about any confusion." She clicked off.
"That ought to keep them busy for a while."

Indeed, by the time the speakers squawked again the sta­tion was just a
disk against the reflective side of Centaurus VII. The voice that came
this time was deeper and more emphatic than that of the station's duty
communicator.

/"Seeker, /this is Colonel G.R. Davis, Centaurus Station commander. You
are ordered to return to base forthwith. We have checked with both
station command computer and EX Control on C?V. The /Seeker /is not due
for over­haul for another six weeks."

“I know,” Sanchez replied calmly. "We thought we'd start her out early
and bring her in slow so we could give her systems a thorough
run?through in case there are any on?the?verge problems. I'm anxious to
be rid of her."

"You will be rid of her permanently?and all other pos­sible commands if
you don't return her to dock immedi­ately." Voices could be heard
arguing in the background.

Another voice came over the speaker. Ryo recognized this one as
belonging to the Eint elder human.

/"Seeker, /this is Dr. Rijseen, in charge of the direct con­tact branch
of the special xenology project here at the sta­tion. We have discovered
that the alien is absent from his quarters. A thorough search has been
made of the station. While it may be that he is hiding somewhere, we
have ev­ery reason to believe that he is on the /Seeker, /and not as a
stowaway. We will continue to operate on that assumption unless we can
be persuaded otherwise."

The young xenologist moved forward. Sanchez gave him a stare, then
nodded slowly. Bhadravati spoke toward the pickup.

"Ryozenzuzex is aboard, Maarten."

"Japan, is that you? I wondered where the hell you got to when the
alarms went off. What's going on?"

"Well, you know, it's a funny thing," the young re­searcher began. Ryo
could see that he was very nervous and uncertain. No hint of this
surfaced in his voice, but it was evident in his posture and movements,
to which Ryo was more sensitive than most humans. "But the bug, as many
refer to him, once saved the lives of every crew member on this ship."

"All that's well known. What has it to do with the crew's unauthorized
action?" The elder spoke with feigned igno­rance that would have been
admirable to an AAnn, Ryo thought.

Taourit looked over at the captain. "There's a ship de­taching from the
station."

"Supralight?"

The cocontroller shook his head. "Too small. Intersystem capability only."

She nodded once, listened as Bhadravati replied to Rij­seen's question.

"It's not right to dissect an intelligent being, no matter that he might
be understanding about it. That's the remark­able thing about this, you
know. Ryo sympathizes with the staff's majority viewpoint. He knows
about your intentions, you see."

"You didn't have to tell him that," Davis' voice said.

Bhadravati laughed. "You're quite right, Colonel. We didn't. He already
knew. Found his file in the station bank."

"That's impossible!" The colonel sounded upset.

"You didn't put a strong enough block on it. He was rummaging through
and came across it himself, did the necessary bypass all by his
lonesome. The Thranx are su­perb logicians and excellent with computers.
That's in his records too."

The channel was silent for a while. When Davis re­sponded it was in a
gentler, more reasoning tone. "Bhadra­vati, there is more at stake here
than you know. I admit that this Ryo individual seems friendly enough,
but you cannot positively deny the possibility that his `escape from his
home world might simply have been a ploy to get him to a human system."

"If it's a ploy, Colonel," Sanchez said into the pickup, "it's working
damn well. Better than yours."

"Captain Sanchez, you and everyone operating alongside you will be
completely pardoned if you will just return the /Seeker /to dock.
Otherwise you will be classed as criminals, and treated as such."

"Ship is beginning to move outward, straight for us," Taourit whispered.

She nodded again, her attention on the pickup. "Don't threaten me,
Colonel. I react real nervously to threats."

"Where do you think you're taking that ship?" Davis de­manded.
"Centaurus V? Three? Earth, maybe? The word will precede you. The
services will be looking for the /Seeker /at every established station
and every shuttleport on all the civilized worlds."

"Blot all the civilized worlds," Sanchez informed him as­suredly. "We
considered every alternative before embark­ing on this, Colonel. If
we're compelled to, we'll take Ryo home."

"Then what?" Davis' voice was more curious than threatening. "Once you
return him to his world, where do you expect you can return to?"

"We don't expect to," was the quiet reply.

Dead silence came from the speaker. It was matched by the atmosphere in
the control room. Since the colonel apparently could not think of a
suitable response, it was Rij­seen who finally resumed the conversation.

"Very well, then. We will drop the plans for the dissec­tion. The vote
was close enough to allow that. Guarantees will be drawn up so that no
one can override. Not even the military."

Davis' voice, in the background: "You don't have that authority, Dr.
Rijseen."

"If you will check your records," the distant voice of the staff head
advised him, "you will find that I am in com­plete control of this
project, sir. That authority extends to anything below a direct military
threat to the civilized worlds. Human civilized worlds," he added, with
just a tinge? of amusement. "I do not regard one isolated and avowedly
friendly alien as constituting such a threat."

"How do we know you'll do what you say?" asked San­chez.

"Ask Dr. Bhadravati."

"Obviously, Dr. Rijseen and I have disagreed on a num­ber of matters. Or
I wouldn't be here at this moment." Bhadravati flashed a bright smile.
"I believe he is trustwor­thy. I have never known him to break his word.
I believe it once cost him a substantial scientific prize and
accompany­ing honors. He is one of the few scientists I know whose word
is as sound as his studies."

Bonnie spoke toward her own console pickup. "I believe you, sir. If Dr.
Bhadravati trusts you, then I'm willing to trust you. But can you vouch
for your associates? And can you guarantee the cooperation of Colonel
what's?his­ name?"

Muffled sounds issued from the speaker. Then, "I will go along with
whatever Dr. Rijseen and the science staff advise. My sole concern is
for the safety of the civ? of the human?inhabited worlds, and for
government property, of which you are presently in unlawful possession.
If that is returned undamaged, then I am perfectly willing to stay out
of this." His voice dropped to an irritated rumble. "I would far /rather
/stay out of this. Would you people please make up your minds?"

"I believe you, Colonel," Bonnie continued. "There's just one problem.
We're not dealing solely with scientific decisions anymore." She glanced
at Sanchez, who returned a comforting smile.

Bonnie took a deep breath. Her voice trembled slightly. "In Service
Corridor Two?Four Dee you'll find ... you'll find ..." She hesitated,
forced herself to go on. "You'll find the bodies of Loo Hua?sung and
/Seeker /maintenance consultant Richard Weldon."

Rijseen's voice did not change as he asked, "Bodies? Both dead?"

"Yes, sir."

"Weren't you and engineer Hua?sung engaged to be mar­ried at one time?"

"There was?we talked about it, yes."

Ryo was staring at her. Finally he understood the rela­tionship that had
existed between his two closest human friends. They were, not quite
premated, but living in simi­lar status. It explained a great many things.

"Weldon suspected our intentions," Bonnie rushed on. "He managed to
follow one of us, maybe more. I don't know."

"I wonder why he didn't sound the alarm, if he knew," said Colonel Davis.

"He had other plans," Bonnie told him. "Plans of his own. You know how
restricted access was to Ryo. Of the /Seeker's /crew, generally only Loo
and I were allowed to see him once he'd been established in his own
burrow?his quarters.

"When Weldon became suspicious of our actions, he bided his time. He was
waiting for us in the service corri­dor. He didn't have the slightest
interest in stopping us. All he wanted was to kill Ryo. Loo?Loo stepped
between them."

"Cocontroller Taourit here," said the man on Sanchez's right. "I'm the
one who shot Weldon. For the record." He said it proudly.

"I don't understand," Davis was muttering. "Two men dead. Why did this
Weldon want to kill the alien?"

"Because to Weldon, Ryo was an ugly, stinking, hard­shelled, smelly
slimy bug. That's why, Colonel. That's the attitude we're going to have
to contend with and that's why we have to be allowed to establish formal
contact with Ryo's race before word of their existence is leaked to the
general populace.

"By the way, you ought to put a seal on environmental specialist Mila
Renstaad. She felt the same way as Weldon and could cause trouble."

"I'll handle that," Davis said curtly.

"If we don't make successful, friendly contact," she went on, "then any
chance our two peoples have for understand­ing each other will be
drowned by the initial outpouring of visceral, ancestral loathing for
creatures of Ryo's appear­ance." She broke off suddenly, as if amazed at
the length and passion of her unintended polemic.

"That's all I have to say about it, sir. I've already lost a?a very good
friend. As you said, two men are dead. That's only a portent of what
could come."

"No disrespect intended, Colonel Davis," Sanchez said, "but you can only
speak for your immediate staff. The same is true for you, Dr. Rijseen."

"I will enter the revised staff recommendation in the computer," Rijseen
said, not offended. "You can check it, through your on?board system. All
points about keeping this quiet are well taken and will be properly
acted upon.

"As to whether this incident will be followed by your suggested
establishment of formal contact with the Thranx, that remains to be
discussed. On that I really do not have the authority to make promises.
Such a decision requires the blessings of at least three of the five
acting members of the ruling board of the Terran Society for the
Advance­ment of Science and Exploration, plus permission from the
appropriate governmental agencies and elected authorities. The political
ramifications are explosive."

"Then if you cannot promise, you can at least promise to try," Sanchez said.

"I will do my best. Of course, if you do not return there can be no
discussion. What do you say?"

"It's not for me to make the decision." She looked back at the large
arthropod who was carefully preening his left antenna.

"Ryo, I don't know you as well as I'd like to. Not as well as Bonnie
does, or Loo did. This is your choice to make. If you insist, we'll move
out to five planetary diameters and head for your home. I know what
awaits you there, but it's up to you to decide." She didn't smile. She
rarely did. "I wouldn't blame you after all this for wanting to return
to your own kind."

"I really am not sure what to do. I am an agricultural expert, not one
prepared to determine the course of future relations between two species."

"Like it or not," Bonnie said, "you've been put in that position."

"Put your trust in God," Bhadravati urged him.

"Yours or mine?"

"There's only one God, by whatever name you call him," the scientist said.

"Theology student, yes? I can see that you and I are going to have many
long conversations, Dr. Bhadravati. There is a friend of mine?at least,
I left him as a friend ­whom I think you would enjoy talking to more
than me, but he is not with us right now. I hope someday you have the
privilege of meeting him."

"So do I. Like everything else, though, that's up to you."

So while the humans waited and watched their instru­ments, Ryo thought.
Of Fal waiting on Willow?wane. Or was she? Of his comfortable and
unpressured position with the Inmot, which had once seemed so dull and
pointless and which now seemed unbearably inviting. Of his sisters and
their families.

What would Ilvenzuteck advise me to do? he wondered. What would the
hivemother say? He wished desperately he could consult with both those
wise matriarchs. But there was no one to consult; not a clannmother, not
a poet, not a larva. He stood alone in an alien ship, surrounded by five
monsters who meant him well and who would do his bid­ding.

That trust was not to be exploited. And what of the hu­man Loo who had
died protecting him? Which would be the best way to insure that no
additional deaths would re­sult? Which way, which way, to allay the
mindless hate that festered among the less intelligent members of both
species?

Sanchez was right. He badly wanted to return home. But to what? To
prison and reconditioning? His own kind had left him with no promises.
Here at least he had gained something of a commitment. As to whether
that commit­ment would be honored, well ... If he returned home, five
humans whom he'd come to like very much would return here to suffer. If
he remained to work and cajole and fight for contact, only he could lose.

As so many things did, it came down to simple mathe­matics.

Captain Sanchez's hand was poised over the control con­sole, he noticed.
A screen showed the small ship that was coming toward them from the station.

He executed a multiple gesture indicative of fifth?degree sardonicism,
with fourth?degree resignation and just a flavoring of irony. No one,
including Bonnie, was sufficiently well versed yet in Thranx to
interpret it. Perhaps someday they would be.

"Let us return. If all of you are willing to trust this Dr. Rijseen,
then so am I:"

"I'll be sure to tell him that," Bhadravati said. "I'll make it a point
to tell him to his face."

"You can tell him yourself, Ryo." Sanchez's fingers danced on the controls.

The /Seeker /pirouetted gracefully on its latitudinal axis. Systemwise
it was facing inward once again. The thoughts and spirits of its
inhabitants were soaring in a different direction entirely.


  Chapter Fourteen

 

"'You don't change the destiny of an entire people that quickly. It
takes time."

The man in the azure jumpsuit was waving his hands as he spoke. Ryo
thought he could be very fluent in Low Thranx. The human was short and
corpulent. His hair was completely white. It descended in waves down his
collar. His pink forehead gleamed in the light, almost shiny enough to
pass for stained chiton. If I were to press on it, Ryo reminded himself,
my finger would not slide off as is normal but would move inward until
encountering bone. He shuddered slightly and doubted he would ever grow
used to the idea of wearing one's body outside one's skeleton.

Though he possessed only half the requisite number of limbs, in his
metallic attire the man looked very much like a Thranx. He was a part of
the hierarchy of the human government, a Secretary of something. His
position was not as high as they'd hoped for, but Sanchez and Bonnie had
assured Ryo that it was substanial enough. His arrival on Centaurus V,
though at night and in comparative secret, had caused something of a
stir on that world.

Several others had come with him or ahead of him, trav­eling the long
way from distant Earth to C?V and then out to the system border station
slowly orbiting C?VII. From there they had been escorted by shuttle to
the wardroom of the /Seeker. /Sanchez and her associates, despite
repeated assurances of noninterference from Davis and Dr. Rijseen, had
chosen to remain on board and in free space. It helped, the captain
explained, their peace of mind.

Rijseen was also present. So were Sanchez and Bonnie. The others were
monitoring ship functions?and other items of interest. Outside the
observation port that domi­nated the wardroom lay the cold dark mass of
Centaurus VII, the faint disk of the station itself, and two much
smaller spots of light that Sanchez and Taourit had assured Ryo were
warships.

They did not seem to worry the /Seeker's /captain, who was confident the
ship could engage its Supralight drive before either of those motionless
warcraft could do her any damage. The warcraft were present mostly to
make an im­pression, though whether on Ryo, his human friends, or the
visiting dignitaries was hard to say. They could not engage their own
drives in their present position without destroy­ing the C?VII station
and its five thousand inhabitants.

Debate proceeded in the wardroom of the /Seeker /in/ /an atmosphere of
cordial uncertainty.

"Of course, I have no authority to commit my people to any kind of
formal treaty," Ryo was saying. "I admit that as a representative of my
species I stand here unappointed and unanointed. But from all I have
observed, all I have experienced, I believe an alliance between our
peoples not merely to be desirable but vital."

One of the human officials spoke up. He was ordinarily silent and said
very little. Nor did he seem gifted with un­usual intelligence. Yet his
comments were always relevant and to the point.

"I can understand your use of the term desirable. But 'Vital'? I've been
informed that your command of our lan­guage is quite good, and from what
I've seen so far I wouldn't dispute that. But are you sure of your use
of the word?"

"Yes. Vital." Ryo added a gesture of maximum emphasis that was lost on
his attentive listeners. "Vital for our sur­vival because of the
increasing depredations of the AAnn and because our culture badly needs
a kick in its gestalt, vital to you for your mental stability."

Several of the officials stirred uneasily, but the white ­haired man in
their midst only laughed. "I've studied the claims you've made for your
psychtechs. Alliances are not made by psychologists."

"Maybe that wouldn't be such a bad change," Sanchez suggested softly.

The man glared at her. "I understand Mr. Ryoz­ryiez ..."

"Just Ryo," the Thranx said.

"I understand your reasoning." He bent to examine pa­pers on the table
in front of him, spoke while reading. "It is your contention that a
close alliance between and associa­tion of our peoples would be
beneficial to the mental health of the human species."

"I have reasons to believe that to be so," admitted Ryo.

"So you think you're better than we?"

"Not better, just different. As I just stated, I believe there are many
things you have to offer in return, though doubtless many officials of
the government of Hivehom would dispute that."

"You mentioned a `kick' of some kind," put in another official.

"Our culture is immensely successful. We have enjoyed interspecies peace
for thousands of years. This stability has bred technological success.
It has also led to sterility in other areas. Many of your art forms, for
example, I find delightful. Your music, your forms of recreation ...
there is great energy there, reflective of your racial hys­teria. These
are outlets for your cerebral furies. We could be another. It would
benefit us both."

"Then you want to channel us?" the fat man said dan­gerously.

"No, no!" Ryo struggled to convey his exasperation as best he could in
human terms, without the use of gestures. It was a constant struggle to
talk only with air and not with your limbs and body. "I don't want to
channel you, don't want to see you directed. There is nothing of
dominance in this. I don't want us to do anything for you, or to you.
Only with you."

"With us." The official considered. "A fine sentiment, but by your own
admission it will be difficult to convince your own people of that."

"They will be frightened of you at first, as they were of the crew of
this ship. As I was. We must overcome old emotions, all of us. Shape
must not interfere with reason. Nor must your psychotic tendencies."

"We do not have psychotic tendencies." The official was uncomfortable.

"Talk to your own consultants," Sanchez advised him. "Study human
history. We should not be afraid of admit­ting that we are what we are"

"Consider your own state of mind right this minute," Rijseen added.
"Then look at this alien across from you. He is far from home and among
what are to him /creatures /of surpassing ugliness. See how calm he is,
how relaxed and at ease."

That wasn't entirely true, Ryo thought, but he wasn't about to step on
the scientist's hypothesis.

"Would a human placed in the same situation react this way? We know he
wouldn't. We know it because Captain Sanchez and her people did not,*
*and they were trained for such confrontation. They kicked and screamed
and acted like?well, like humans. From my studies I am convinced that
Ryo's mental stability is the result not of racial or indi­vidual
weakness or fatalism, but of a better understanding of himself."

"I can see that he's convinced you, at least," the official said.

"Facts," Bhadravati said softly, "can be most persuasive, sir."

The official rose and walked toward the large port. He stood and stared
silently at the vast dead world below. The star Centaurus (that was not
Alpha because of a great mis­take) was a dim, distant point of light.
Ryo could see his fingers twisting and entwining in some secret ritual.

"It's difficult," the man murmured, "very difficult. For example, we
have only your word for the supposedly re­lentless hostility of these AAnn."

"They'll give you ample proof themselves soon enough," Ryo noted.

"Our records show that the ship that attacked us is dif­ferent from any
Thranx vessel we saw," Sanchez told him. "If half of what Ryo says about
them is true, they will present a real danger."

Ryo tried to divine the man's mood by looking at him, but failed
utterly. He tried to believe that the continued silence was a sign that
the man's indecision was weakening, that despite his uncertainties he
was coming around to the side of reason.

He turned, his fingers still working, silhouetted by a dead world. "I
mean no offense?damn, I don't know how to put this. There are problems
here that logic will not solve. It's simply that?"

"That if I were of a different ancestry," Ryo told him, "everything
would be simpler. If I did not look like a big, icky, crawly insect."

The Secretary looked distinctly uncomfortable as Ryo continued. "I have
had ample time to study the phobia most humans have regarding my tiny
relatives on your world. We are not properly insects, by your
classification system."

"The general public," the Secretary replied, "is not interested in
scientific niceties. You look like something out of many of their worst
nightmares."

"And what about you, Mr. Secretary?" Ryo slid off his saddle and
approached. "How do I look to you?" He reached up with both tru? and
foothands and grasped the lower edge of the man's shirt.

"Does my touch make your skin crawl? An intriguing phenomenon, by the
way. Do I make you want to vomit? Does my smell make you ill?" He let
loose of the material. The Secretary hadn't moved.

"As a matter of fact," he replied calmly, "your smell, of which I was
apprised prior to my arrival, is quite as lovely as reported. However,
our media systems are not suffi­ciently advanced to convey odiferous
stimuli. Only sight and sound. I'm afraid that when it comes to the
question of contact, sight will predominate in determining responses."

Ryo had turned and retaken his saddle. "So you are not optimistic."

"You have already had an unfortunate encounter with one fanatic, I
understand?"

"Yes. It cost the life of a very dear human friend of mine. I believe
the incident proves not the adverse reac­tions my people might provoke,
but the opposite. A human has sacrificed his life for mine, grotesque
quasi?insect though I am."

"A singular, isolated example involving a man who was a trained
explorer. The same reaction cannot be expected from the average human."

"Or for that matter, the average Thranx," Ryo admitted. "Somehow a
solution must be found."

"I can't see one." The Secretary was not encouraging. "We would have to
demonstrate beyond a doubt that our two species could live side by side
in harmony and under­standing despite thousands of years of mutual
conditioning to the contrary.

"The best I can realistically offer is a chance to open tentative
communications via Deep Space transmissions. Even then I'll have to
combat the bigots and paranoids in my own department. But if we exercise
caution, with luck and some social maturation we might during the next
cou­ple of hundred years?"

"Apologies for interruption, sir." Ryo cut him off sharply. "The AAnn
will not wait a couple of hundred years. They will extend their
mischief?making to include your people. They know just how far they can
push, how deeply they can wound. They will try to bleed you to death.
When you are weak enough, they will attack. Each day they grow more
powerful, more confident. For the sake of both our species we must
strike an alliance now. That can­not be done through cautious,
long?range transmissions."

A successful politician knows when to be tactful and when to be
truthful. The Secretary was very successful.

"Unfortunately, the facts exist. We cannot alter our shape any more than
you can alter yours. I can see no quick way to prove species compatibility."

"I have given much thought to the problem," Ryo re­plied. "I had hoped
not to have to make the proposal I will now lay before you all. It is a
bit?well, theatrical. My friend Wuuzelansem would approve the form if
not the content. It is all I can think of, however. It will settle the
question of compatibility permanently, I should think.

"If the operation becomes known, it will be condemned with many
expressions of outrage and horror by both our peoples. I fully expect
all of you," and he gestured around the room, "to react in similar
fashion as I explain. I entreat you to let me finish, and to consider
what I say calmly and reasoningly. I ask you to put instinctive passions
aside while considering the larger issues we are dealing with here. With
success will come admiration and vindication. Failure would mean
dishonor and much worse for all in­volved."

"I don't like choices that offer only extremes. I prefer to remain in
the middle," the Secretary murmured.

"There is no middle here, sir. Are you not risk?takers? Do you humans
not like to dance with the laws of chance?"

"We've been known to do so now and then," one of the other government
officials commented drily.

"Then I shall detail my thoughts. I request only that you do not reject
until I have finished." At least, he thought, I have gained their full
attention. Having acquired consider­able wisdom during the past years,
however, he was not sanguine about the chances for acceptance.

"Now then," he began briskly, "if I have studied your customs
efficiently* *I believe I am not wrong in saying that you look
unfavorably upon kidnaping and infanticide ..."

 

The world that hove into view on the screen was so ach­ingly familiar
that Ryo found himself shaking.

"Are you all right, Ryo?" Bonnie stared back at him from her seat.

"I am. It's only that I hadn't expected so powerful a reaction." As he
stared the misty white?green globe swelled to fill the entire screen.
They were diving at it very fast, as was planned. "I thought myself
sufficiently detached, re­moved to a point where such mundane instincts
would not affect me. That is clearly not the case. I feel rather numbed."

"I understand." She watched him sympathetically. "We are subject to the
same emotions. We call it homesickness." She lifted her gaze to the
small screen. They were in Ryo's quarters on board the heavily screened
/Seeker. /She wiped the ever?present sweat from her forehead. She'd been
sit­ting with him for over an hour now and her clothing was soaked.
"It's a beautiful world, your Willow?wane. Your home."

"Yes. Most of the. settlement is on the opposite hemi­sphere."

"Don't worry, Elvira knows what to do. She'll hold this dive and veer
back to Space Plus range at the first sign of a probe. Though if what
you say is true, that's unlikely to happen."

"I thinly we will be all right. The additional screening equipment your
people installed should give us the elec­tronic appearance of a tiny
meteor temporarily drawn into low orbit. Inside five pd's of Hivehom or
Warm Nursery we would soon be detected, but there are many dead zones
above Willow?wane. I believe the /Seeker will /be able to or­bit
undetected long enough to allow us to ferry our material to the surface."

The door admit chimed and Ryo called, "Enter, please." It slid aside and
a gust of cold air from the corridor beyond momentarily chided him.
Bonnie moved her arms grate­fully in the brief breeze.

A small human walked into the room. Ryo studied it with his usual
fascination. Humans knew no larval stage, did not experience the terror
and wonder and glory of meta­morphosis. Like many mammals, they were
born into the shape they would have for their whole life.

They did not have the benefit of an extended learning period in which to
rest and absorb knowledge. Instead they were thrust immediately into a
highly competitive adult en­vironment. Though no psychtech, Ryo believed
this un­happy arrangement had much to do with the species' para­noia and
belligerence.

The larva?no, he corrected himself, the male child­ was named Matthew.
He stopped next to Bonnie, lifted his hand instinctively. She took it in
her own.

"Is that where we're going, Ms. Thorpe?" Ryo noted that though he held
his other hand in his mouth he was not using his mandibles to clean the
fingers. The habit, he'd been told, had a psychological rather than
practical pur­pose.

"Yes, that's where we're going, Matthew. Isn't it pretty?" She bent over
to put her face at his level. Both regarded the viewscreen.

"It looks kinda like home," he said.

"Most inhabitable planets look alike."

"What's `inha/bit/ibitible' mean?"

"Inhabitable," she corrected him. "It means we can usually live there."

"It looks like a lime sundae. How long will we be there?"

"Not so very long."

Matthew thought a moment, squinted at the screen. "When will I see Mommy
and Daddy again?"

Bonnie hesitated, then smiled maternally. "After school is finished.
They know you're away, you know."

"Yeah, sure."

"Do you like this school so far?"

"Oh, yeah!" Sudden excitement suffused his face. "There's lots of neat
things to do and tapes to study and neat food and friends! I like it a
lot better than my old school. And it's on a starship, too." He screwed
his face into a thoughtful frown. "Too many girls, though."

Bonnie smiled.

"But it's lots of fun. I never thought school could be so much fun. I'd
like to go outside, though. 'Course, I know I can't do that in space,
and I don't have a envirosuit."

"We'll be landing real soon now," she informed him, "and you'll be able
to play outside. You'll have new lessons to learn."

"Oh, that's okay. I don't mind studying. I like school."

"I know you do, Matthew." She reached out, rumpled his brown curls.
"That's one reason why you were chosen to come on the ship for this
special term."

"Yeah. It's sure fun." He studied the lime sundae a while longer. Then
his attention shifted to the figure sprawled on its right side on the
high bed. He still held onto Bonnie's hand but his other fingers were no
longer in his mouth. That was a baby habit, he knew, and he wasn't a
baby anymore. He was determined to stop it.

"Hi, Ryo. "

"Hello, Matthew."

"Will you wordwhistle for me again?"

"Anytime," and he made the Thranx word for happy.

Matthew's brows drew together. His face twisted and his mandibles pursed
tight. At first nothing happened when he blew through them. The second
time a soft whistling emerged. He smiled. "How's that?"

"Very good, but it needs to be higher at the end. That's the whistleword
for happy."

"I know that. You think I'm stupid or somethin'?" He tried again. The
sound floated through the room, louder this time.

"That's better. Much better. Want to try the word for sun?up?morning?"

"Naw, not now." He looked up at Bonnie, then back to the figure on the
bed. It was a funny bed, be thought, but then Ryo was funny?shaped, so
he supposed it matched up okay.

"Want to play horsey?"

"Sure." Ryo slid off the lounge. Horsey was a young­ human game, in
which one partner assumed the part of a domesticated animal. It was all
part of a much greater and far more dangerous game.

He immediately lowered himself to the floor so the boy could climb
aboard. It embarrassed him whenever one of the children asked to play
the horse.


  Chapter Fifteen

 

It doesn't matter who or what you are, Ryo mused. Wherever home is,
there is something about its smell that distinguishes it from any other
world.

He inhaled deeply, his thorax expanding with a rush as he gazed around
the little clearing. Off to his left, muldringia vine grew thick and
close until the unscreened sunlight turned them pale and weak at the
clearing's edge. Tall grass wore a corona of bright little yellow
flowers. Snuff bugs whizzed through the morning air. His antennae waved
through the pollen recently dispersed by an overripe bom­bush. The heady
aroma threatened to upset his balance on the ramp.

"My home." He turned to the open lock and those stand­ing there. "Is it
not wonderful?"

Liquid was already materializing on Bonnie's exposed skin. Bhadravati
and several other friends crowded around her, testing the air.

"Very lush," Bhadravati agreed. "But to us, very hot and terribly humid."

"A mild second?season day," Ryo noted. "I doubt the humidity is much
more than 80 percent. With luck it will top a comfortable 90 by midday eve."

"With luck," Elvira Sanchez muttered gloomily as she leaned through the
lock and gazed across the treetops. Her concern was for what might
appear from the clouds.

"If we had been detected on approach," a voice said from inside the
ship, "search craft would be overflying this area by now."

"I know. I'm just a natural worrier," the captain called over a
shoulder. Hands on hips, she turned to look past Ryo. "A good place to
lose weight, anyway."

Ryo made a gesture of puzzlement. "Why would you want to lose weight?and
how?"

"Cosmetic reasons," she replied. "When we move around in very hot
weather, our bodies sweat water and we can lose weight."

"Extraordinary." Ryo shook his head to indicate amaze­ment, a gesture he
had picked up from the human physical vocabulary. "Being constrained by
our exoskeletons we are considerably less flexible in such matters."

"A world without obesity," Bonnie murmured. "That would be enough to
induce some humans to visit here."

"But not enough of them." Bhadravati squinted into the heat. "Hence our
illegal visit."

Highly illegal. The Secretary had provided covert assis­tance and
laundered funds, but had made it quite clear that if the project was
discovered he would denounce it as vocif­erously as anyone else in the
government. Only tremendous pressure from members of the scientific
community, in­cited by Rijseen and Bhadravati; had enabled the
expedi­tion to literally get off the ground at all.

Clattering and shouts sounded from below the ramp, where humans and
their machines were wrestling with the contents of the shuttle's hold.

"We should have the first portion of the shelter set up by the time you
return," Bonnie told Ryo. "Of course, if you're not back within the
prescribed time period?"

"I know. You'll disappear, leaving me with quite a lot of explaining to
do. Assuming I am given time to explain."

"I thought you said your people were highly civilized about such matters."

"Fear of the unknown, while exaggerated among Homo /sapiens, /is not
completely unknown among the Thranx," he responded. "It is such
attitudes we are battling to over­come."

"I hope you're back in time." She reached out to touch one of his
antennae. "Don't get yourself blown apart. You're important. It's not
the Thranx we're friends with, yet. It's YOU."

"I will endeavor most strenuously to preserve myself," he assured her as
he started down the ramp. Bonnie and the others followed to the bottom.
There they turned to aid in the unloading and setting up.

Peering up at the shuttle he could see numerous faces pressed against
the glass of the tiny ports. Some of the faces were smaller and less
well defined than others. Soon, Matthew, he thought at the faces. Soon
you'll be able to come out and play. Soon I hope to have a new game for
you and your friends.

Moving through the jungle on foot was slow and awkward, even though he
remembered the area reasonably well. That was one of the principal
reasons it had been selected. And he had made his way through far wilder
and* *more hostile flora. Oh, so long ago!

Days passed. Anxiously he kept watch on the frond­ shrouded sky for
signs of search craft. After a half?month had passed he was finally
convinced the shuttle had set down unnoticed.

Before much more time passed, Ryo found himself standing among the first
row of tettoq trees. Across the orchard to his left should be the
machine shop where bro­ken field equipment was repaired. He'd emerged
from the jungle slightly to the south of the Inmot holdings, but he
still recognized the landscape. The jungle had not been pushed back that
far since his hurried departure so long ago.

It was very hard to remain concealed in the trees at the jungle's edge.
He wanted more than anything to skitter shouting and yelling down the
nearest entryway, but that was not to be, not this night and not for
some time, if ever again.

He waited until sleeptime was well along and the stars were high up
behind the cloud cover before leaving the shelter of the jungle.
Somehow, as he made his cautious way through the carefully cultivated
vegetation, he ex­pected things to be more different then they were. In
ac­tuality he hadn't been away that long. Mentally, he'd been absent for
years.

There were no patrols to avoid, since there was nothing to patrol
against. Twice he encountered premates or cu­rious youngsters out for a
nocturnal stroll. No one recog­nized him. That was fortunate, because
only total darkness would have been sufficient to hide his movements
com­pletely.

It would be simpler if they were humans, he thought as he increased his
pace after successfully slipping past the most recent pair. Humans were
practically blind in weak light. They really are an amazing species, he
mused. Con­sider what they have accomplished with poor vision, poor
hearing, a weak sense of smell, no faz ability at all, and half the
sensible number of limbs. Not to mention the bur­den of wearing their
skeletons inside out. Quite remark­able.

He knew that a great deal was riding on his little night­time stroll. He
hurried on a little faster.

The machine shop had not been moved. No one was guarding the tools or
heavy equipment parked outside. Theft was not unknown in the larger
hives, but bulky mate­rial was quite safe in a community the size of
Paszex be­cause there was no place to steal it to.

Such trust did not extend to leaving the ignition controls activated,
however. Foolishness was present among the ir­reverent in Paszex in
proportion to the population. Ryo had a busy half?hour jimmying the
controls of one harvester so it could be started with ease.

The machine was used to transport bulk loads from fields to processing
chutes. With the familiarity of long practice he started the engine. The
harvester slid smoothly forward on triple rows of balloon wheels.

There was an awkward moment when he parked the harvester outside the
particular entryway he intended to use, for some night stroller might
think to question the pres­ence of the big machine so far from any
agricultural sta­tion. No one appeared, however.

After altering the internal temperature of the harvester's cargo bay to
suit his intentions he slid from the control cab and entered the hive.
Nothing unfamiliar assaulted his sen­ses. Yet he didn't feel quite as at
home as he'd thought he would. Nothing was different, nothing had been
changed. He'd spent most of his life in the very corridors he was now
walking. Yet there was a difference, and he feared it was permanent.

Most of the citizenry were asleep, but some were still hard at work. The
regular maintenance crews, for example, were preparing the corridors for
the next workday. He had to exercise a little care.

He descended several levels, turned at a familiar corner, then into his
destination. Workers were busier here than just about anywhere else in
Paszex. That was no surprise. He knew it would be so, but he could not
avoid it.

"Good evening, sir," the monitor said.

"Good evening."

"It's very late, sir."

"I know, but I had difficulty sleeping and thought I would admire our
new cagin." Thranx did not have nieces and nephews. A new birth was
relative to all in his clan. The relationship was sufficiently general
that Ryo believed he could gain admittance merely by claiming it. Every
clan had a new cagin or two in the Nursery.

The monitor did not question him. "Very well, but be quiet. They are all
sleeping soundly."

"I know. I will be."

He entered the Nursery proper. The long rows of curved study saddles lay
in two orderly rows against the glazed walls. Partitions formed
individual cubicles. About three ­fourths of the saddles were occupied
by larvae in various stages of maturation.

How many years ago had he lain in one such saddle? he thought. Immobile,
thirsting for knowledge and food, whit­ing away the days in idle study
with his Nurserymates while anticipating metamorphosis.

Now he was in the Nursery again, with a different pur­pose. A glance
from the doorway showed only three Nurses present. Even that seemed
cause for concern. They moved busily about their tasks.

None of them disturbed him or thought to question his presence as he
made his way casually down the central aisle. The saddle designs had not
been altered in his life­time. All were portable, each equipped with a
tiny motor enabling it to be easily moved should an occupant require a
shift to surgery or another department.

He pretended to gaze admiringly at an infant near the end of the aisle.
The emergency exit should be nearby. These were not simple holdovers
from ancient times when every Thranx Nursery possessed them, but served
as im­portant escape routes in case of fire.

The exit should lead to a ramp at the outskirts of the hive. One who
used such a passageway for nonemergency purpose was subject to
substantial penalties, but then, so was a kidnaper. The confluence of
crimes and antisocial behavior in general among human and Thranx is one
of our less obvious similarities, he mused.

The larvae he chose were neither newborns nor those on the verge of
metamorphosis. All were approximately at midlarval stage.

His patience was rewarded when not one but two of the Nurses working up
the aisle made their way out of the Nursery. When they did not return he
quietly started work. Two, three, five of the saddles were linked by
couplers. All could now be steered by a single Nurse. or anyone else. A
glance up the aisle showed that the last attendant had disappeared. The
cubicle partitions concealed him rea­sonably well and. would do so until
he had to move his little train out into the open for the short dash to
the emergency exitway. He would be quite satisfied if he could slip them
through without being noticed. He did not have time to worry about how
long he would have until they were missed.

He was linking the sixth and final saddle to the others when a
shockingly familiar scent reached his antennae. They jerked backward in
reaction. The scent was followed by a querulous and equally familiar voice.

"Ryo?" He turned. It was Fal.

She wore her uniform vest and neck pouch and was star­ing at him. How
much she'd observed he didn't know, not that it mattered now. She raised
all four hands and ges­tured at the little line of linked saddles. Their
motors whis­pered, their occupants slept on, oblivious.

"Where did you come from and what do you think you're doing?"

Ryo discovered that he was breathing in quick, short gasps. His gaze
went past her to the Nursery entrance. The other two Nurses still hadn't
returned but he daren't count on their absence much longer.

"I haven't time to explain," he told her. "You must help me get these
children out of the Nursery and up to the surface. Everything depends on
speed now."

She took a step away from him. "I don't understand you. You told me you
were involved in some kind of govern­ment project. Then that same agency
told us you'd turned criminal." She made a gesture of considerable
confusion and uncertainty. "I don't know who or what to believe any­more."

"Everything you were told is true, in its fashion," he said, unfailingly
honest. "To a point. I was working on a government project and I am now
something of a law­breaker. Probably worse than that, according to some.
In the opinion of others, I am doubtless regarded as a grand hero.
Actually, I'm neither. I'm just me, doing what I think necessary. You
can make your own decision, Fal. But I don't have time to explain
things. Not now."

He touched a control and the line of saddles moved to­ward the emergency
corridor. She hurried around to block the lead saddle.

"I don't know where you've been, Ryo, or why you haven't been in touch
with me or what you've been doing. I don't much care. I do care to see
you again. It's good, I think, in spite of what you did. We have many
things to talk about. In the meantime and for whatever personal rea­sons
of yours, these larvae are going nowhere. This is the Nursery. This is
where they belong and this is where they remain. Unless you can explain
what you're doing, which I sincerely doubt."

"I doubt it myself," he told her, stepping close. "It's more complicated
than you can imagine. I love you, Fal. You are a wonderful, intelligent,
insightful, enjoyable fe­male and my opinion of you will never change
regardless of what you come to think of me and I hope you will excuse
this," and he brought clown two fists with what he fer­vently hoped was
carefully gauged strength between her antennae.

She did not even have time to gasp. Her arms went out in a gesture of
shock and she collapsed to the floor. He bent quickly over her. A glance
up the aisle showed a still empty Nursery. His luck continued.

Her thorax pulsed slowly but steadily as he lifted her onto an empty
saddle and linked it to the other six. She would be unconscious for a
long time while her body healed the cerebral bruise.

The kidnaping would confront the Hive Council with a great mystery. It
would be natural for them to concentrate on Fal's background in the hunt
for motives. With luck they might never make the connection between a
cluster of missing larvae and a long?absent mental defective named
Ryozenzuzex. If the humans had done their part and thor­oughly
camouflaged their shuttle and the new structures, they might have a
great deal of time before the alarm was raised and anyone thought to do
some studious deduction.

With less luck and preparation he might be very dead in a day or two,
along with the six innocent larvae, Fal, and all his human friends. He
preferred not to think about that. In any case, now was not the time.

He met no one in the emergency corridor. No one chal­lenged him when he
emerged on the surface with his un­likely cargo. in tow.

Getting the seven saddles and their occupants into the harvester was
difficult work even with the aid of the ma­chine's autoloading
apparatus. Still he was not interrupted. When the last saddle had been
positioned and locked in place inside the climate?controlled hold he
mounted the cab and gunned the engine. The harvester rumbled off down
the nearest access path.

He was careful to stay on the designated roads, even though it cost him
some time. The last thing he wanted was to leave a clear track behind
him. Soon he was in among the jungle trees, however, and he had to
program the har­vesting equipment to carefully replace the vegetation
the machine bashed through. In a few hours the sun would be up and a
preliminary search of Paszex and its immediate environs would be under way.

Confusion would be his most effective shield. They would inspect the
immediate belt of jungle surrounding the hive fields, but since there
was no reason for the missing Nurse to take her charges farther afield
he didn't think .a deep hunt would commence for several days. By that
time he would be well beyond any sensible search pattern.

He'd entered the missing harvester into the machine­shop program as
off?line, on its way to Zirenba for exten­sive overhaul. Months would
pass before anyone thought to check on its status.

Fal presented a more substantial problem. He did not think she would
remain calm at the sight of his horrific human companions. If she awoke
it might be best to keep her sedated. He would worry about that later.
If the project failed her opinion of him would not matter. If by some
chance it succeeded?well, he would worry about their re­lationship at
that time only.

When the sun rose, so would his young charges. Ryo had spent time in the
Nursery only as an occupant. Very shortly he would have to deal with six
confused, unhappy, and hungry youngsters. He didn't know exactly how he
was going to cope with that, although the past month had taught him
something of handling youngsters and their needs. If he could manage
infants of another species, surely he could deal with those of his own kind.

He managed to do so. The presence of the "sleeping" Nurse, whom they all
recognized, helped to calm them. When she didn't wake up there might be
new problems, but Ryo was grateful for the respite.

The harvester continued to perform admirably, sloshing its way through
the rain forest while automatically covering its own tracks. To assist
it he tried to choose paths that were particularly watery, but he was
positive he must be leaving a trail behind him wide enough for a dozen
Servi­tors to scan.

His only confrontation, however, came not from an an­gry cluster of
Servitors or any of the jungle's omnipresent carnivores, but from
several armed humans who material­ized magically from among the trees
and surrounded the harvester. It was interesting to note that they had
shed the majority of their clothing.

Greetings were exchanged and weapons lowered. A cou­ple of the humans
gazed dumbly back into the jungle along the path restored by the
harvester. They could not believe Ryo had brought off the most difficult
part of the experi­ment.

"You're sure no one's following you?" a beefy male asked. His body fur
was black and full of tight curls.

"It proceeded with admirable smoothness," Ryo said. He was glad no one
challenged him. He was not ready to ex­plain about Fal. That incident
was still painful to recall.

They escorted him to the glade. As the harvester emerged from the trees
Ryo had to struggle before locating the exquisitely hidden shuttle. It
seemed to have sprouted grass, bushes, and yellow flowers.

Other hills marked the sites of the portable buildings the expedition
had brought with them. There would be the sec­tion for housing his six
immobile charges, there one for their human counterparts. Most of the
adults would bi­vouac aboard the shuttle.

Since shuttle and structures were nearly invisible from the ground, Ryo
had no doubt that from the air the illusion would be complete. In
addition to confusing any visual search, the humans also possessed
sophisticated instruments for harmlessly dispersing heat and restricting
sound. They would have privacy and time. That was more than he'd hoped for.

A violent squalling in the form of a rising and falling whistle sounded
from the rear of the harvester. Ryo brought it to a halt. Several other
humans had joined the intercepting forest guards and were peering into
the cargo hold.

Ryo nearly broke a leg as he rushed to get there. In the excitement of
the moment the humans had not considered the effect their appearance
might have on his intelligent and impressionable passengers.

He had not intended that the children confront their nightmares so soon.

 

Matthew remembered the first times.

He wasn't sure why he'd been chosen, but he was glad that he had been.
The world they were visiting was a neat place, full of brightly colored
bugs and flying things, and interesting creepy?crawlies to poke sticks
at through the clear surfaces of shallow ponds.

He didn't have much time to do that, since they kept him and the others
playing with the funny?shaped kids. They were nice, so he didn't mind
not being allowed out­side so much.

Bonnie and the big bug, Ryo, had told him that his new friends were
children just like him, only of Ryo's people. But they didn't look
anything like little Ryos at all. In fact, when Matthew first saw them
his initial reaction and that of his friends had been one of pity. They
had no arms or legs. How could anyone play without arms or legs?

They had huge wormlike bodies. That was kind of icky at first, but they
also had pale colors running just under their skins that were awful
pretty. It was funny to see these colors change from green to blue, from
red to yellow and back again. Matthew wished he could change color like
that.

They smelled real nice, too. Like a field of cut grass, or the hem of
his mother's dress, or the laundry when it was new. The grown?ups were
afraid at first that he and his friends would be frightened of the
larvae, as they called them. That was silly. How could anyone be afraid
of some one who smelled so nice and didn't have arms to hit you with or
legs to kick you with? The larvae, like his best friend Moul, were a lot
more afraid of Matthew and the other human children than the human
children were of them.

On the ship he'd learned to recognize a lot of the funny whistlewords
and click?talk. That was good, because the Thranx kids didn't know any
real speech at all. Matthew was the best of the bunch and he was proud
when the other kids asked him to translate. As the weeks went by,
how­ever, both groups learned from their counterparts. Because the
larvae had flexible mandibles, it turned out they could talk human even
better than Ryo.

This seemed to surprise the grown?ups as much as it pleased them.
Matthew shook his head. Some grown?ups were just plain /dumb. /After
all, a stick is a stick whether you call it a stick or a whistleword.

It surprised him to learn that Moul and the other larvae felt sorry for
him. Sure, Moul didn't have arms and legs, but he didn't run into
things, either, or stick himself with thorns. That embarrassed Matthew
and made him a little bit angry. Sometimes he thought of hitting Moul to
show him what hands were good for.

But no matter what he said or how he said it, neither Moul nor his
companions ever seemed to get mad. Pouty sometimes, but never mad. You
couldn't go around hitting someone like that. And when Moul explained
things to him, Matthew lost a lot of his own mads, too. It was funny the
things grown?ups got excited about.

Matthew had lots of friends back in school on Earth. A couple of them
had also qualified for the trip. One was a bigger boy named Werner, and
Matthew couldn't under­stand /how he'd /made it. He'd beaten Matthew up
a couple of times.

Moul was sorry to hear that when Matthew told him about it.

"I betcha Werner wouldn't try and beat you up," he told Moul one day as
they were sitting in what the grown?ups called the Interaction Room.
"You're too big."

"For now," Moul agreed, "but as he matures he'll out­grow me, and after
metamorphosis I'll be slightly smaller than I am now."

"That's weird," Matthew said. "Getting smaller as you become a grown?up.
But getting a whole new body; that sounds neat. I wish I could
metamorphose." He added an­other magnetic span to the building he and
Moul were de­signing. It was a curved one this time. Moul might not have
any hands, but his suggestions were swell.

/"Anyway," Moul /wondered aloud, "if Werner is bigger and stronger than
you, then why does he feel the need to beat you up? If he's bigger he
ought to be smarter and realize how counterproductive such antisocial
activity is."

"Yeah, well," Matthew muttered, "just once I'd like to pop him back a
good one." He brought one fist into an open palm to produce a smacking
sound.

"But why, would you want to do that?" the studious Moul asked.

"To get even with him." Sometimes even Moul could say the dumbest things.

"For what?"

"For beating me up." Matthew put his hands on his hips and then made the
Thranx sign for mild exasperation. "Boy, you're awfully smart most of
the time, Moul; but now and then you're awful stupid, too."

"I'm sorry," the larva replied. "I'm just ignorant of your ways. It all
seems so silly to me. Wouldn't it be better for the two of you to be
friends?"

"Well, sure it would, I guess," Matthew reluctantly ad­mitted, "but
Werner is a bully. He likes to beat people up."

"Larvae who are smarter than he?"

"Well," the boy thought a moment, "yeah, I think so."

"That's what a `bully' is?someone who beats up some­one physically
weaker than himself?"

"That's right, I guess." Actually Matthew hadn't given the subject much
consideration. To him, a bully was some­one who beat Matthew Bonner up.
The definition need ex­tend no further than that.

"Then he doesn't seem very big to me at all. It sounds to me like he has
a very small mind."

"Yeah, I guess he must. Yes, that's it." Matthew smiled hugely. "A small
mind. A small mind." He burst into de­lighted laughter at having
discovered a gratifying corollary. At the same time he picked up another
span.

"No, not a curved one this time," Moul advised him. "A double?straight.
It will give more support to the tower there."

Matthew studied the growing monument only briefly. Moul was rarely
wrong. "I think you're right." He set the span in place, watched as it
annealed to the nearby side panels. The structure was over a meter high
and still grow­ing. The two youngsters had been working on it off and on
for several days. The adults found it most interesting.

He selected a ridge ellipsoid, moved to emplace it.

"Also on the top, don't you think?" Moul asked.

This time Matthew objected, holding it over the window­panes two?thirds
of the way up the left?hand tower. "Don't you think it would look better
here?"

"Look better." Moul considered. He envied his friend's ability to see in
colors more than he envied him his limbs. "Yes. Yes, I think you are
right, Mattheeew. That is a most intriguing composition."

"We can use two of them." The boy chose a second, matching ellipsoid.
"One here and one up top, where you suggested."

"An excellent suggestion, Mattheeew. Then I really think we'd better
start working on the other side again or we'll overbalance the towers."

"Yeah, that's right." Then he frowned and set the two units back in
their box.

"Is something wrong?"

"I'm bored," Matthew announced, sighing deeply. "I wish they'd let us go
outside by ourselves. I get tired of having grown?ups around."

"I don't," said Moul. "In any case, you know I couldn't go out with you."

"Why not? Oh yeah, your skin would burn."

"During the day it would," the larva admitted mourn­fully. "Anyway, I
think the adults don't want us to go out­side much."

"They sure don't. I wonder why."

"I'm not sure," Moul said thoughtfully. "I respect adults, of course,
but sometimes it seems to me they are capable of mistakes as obvious as
our own."

"Yeah, they're not as smart as they think. I bet I could get you outside
at night." His voice fell to a conspiratorial whisper. "We could fool
'em. Your skin wouldn't burn at night."

"No, it wouldn't," Moul agreed. "I can't get around by myself very well,
though."

"Aw, we'd figure something out. I'd help you."

"And I'd help you. I can see almost as well at night as I can during the
day," the larva told him. "I was informed that you cannot."

"You can see in the /dark?" /Matthew's eyes went wide.

"Quite well. Not as well as my ancestors, but well enough."

"Wow." Matthew could not conceal his awe. "I sure wish I could.
Sometimes back home I wake up at night and can't find the light panels
in the floor and bump around in the dark trying to find the bathroom."

"Bathroom?" Moul echoed, and the conversation shifted easily from the
aesthetics of architecture and plans for nocturnal excursions to another
tack altogether.

Weeks passed. The adults were delighted at the chil­dren's progress,
much of which originated with the experi­mental subjects themselves.

"Want to play Cowboys and Indians?" Matthew asked his friend. It was
raining hard outside the Interaction Room. There could be no thought of
venturing outside, even by oneself.

"I don't know," Moul said curiously. "What's `Cowboys and Indians?' "

"Well, once upon a time on Earth there was a noble, intelligent,
handsome, and just generally sort of neat people called Indians."
Matthew enjoyed being the one to explain for a change. He didn't for a
moment doubt that Moul was smarter than he was, but somehow the usual
resentment he felt toward smarter kids didn't apply to the larva. After
all, Moul had received a lot more education and was perhaps a Terran
year older than he.

"Anyway, their lands were invaded one day by a bunch of people called
the Cowboys. The Cowboys were real nasty. They burned and slaughtered
and stole and lied and all kinds of bad things until finally there were
only a few Indians left. Eventually, though, the Indians got even
be­cause times changed and the life force that kept the Cow­boys going
faded away from their economy and they all died out. But the Indians
kept their traditions and beliefs and lived happily ever after in the end."

"That doesn't sound like a very nice story," murmured Moul doubtfully,
"despite the happy ending. I'm not sure I want to play ... but if you
really want to ...

"Yeah, sure." Matthew climbed to his feet.

Moul rippled back from the human. "It sounds awfully violent, Matthew. I
don't like violent games."

"It won't be bad," the boy assured him. "Now, I'm going to be the
Indians and you can be the Cowboys."

Moul considered. "I think I'd prefer to be the Indians."

"No. I suggested the game," Matthew was a mite bellig­erent, "and I'm
going to be the Indians."

"All right. You can be the Indians."

Matthew frowned at him. "What do you mean, I can be the Indians? Just
like that?"

"Well, of course. Why not?"

"But you said you wanted to be the Indians."

"I do," Moul admitted, "but you obviously want to be them more than I
do. Therefore, it is only sensible to let you be the Indians."

Matthew mulled over this development, which tumbled around in his brain
like a rough gem in a polishing unit. "No," he finally decided, "you can
be the Indians."

"No, no. I understand thoroughly your desire, Mat­theeew. You can be the
Indians. I'll be the Cowboys."

"I've got an idea," the boy said suddenly. "Why don't we /both /of us be
the Indians?"

"Then who'll be the Cowboys?"

Matthew turned and called across the room. "Hey Janie, Ahling, Chuck, Yerl!"

They entered into involved negotiations, but it developed that no one
really wanted to be the Cowboys. They all wanted to be Indians.

In the observation booth behind the one?way, Dr. Jahan Bhadravati turned
to his companions, who at that moment included Bonnie, Captain Sanchez
of the /Seeker, /and a leading representative of Earth's government.
Handshakes were exchanged all around, but the children in the room
beyond would have found the adults' enthusiasm at a dis­play of the
commonplace very puzzling.


  Chapter Sixteen

 

Bonnie was chatting with Ryo as they strolled from the shuttle toward
the laboratory complex when the first rising thunder reached the camp
from overhead. It arose in the north and grew steadily louder until a
pair of quadruple?winged ships roared by, rattling the trees fringing
the glade and scaring hell out of the arboreals.

The two walkers pressed themselves back beneath a can­opy of chamelo
cloth. So did the other humans who'd been out in the comparative cool of
early morning.

After a decent wait Bonnie leaned out to squint toward the southwest.
"Think they saw us?"

"I don't know," said one of the shuttle's crew from be­neath the
overhanging limbs of a nearby tree. He too was staring worriedly
southward. "They were awfully low and moving damn fast." He emerged from
concealment. "I'd better get to my station, just in case."

Bonnie was about to join him when she felt restraining pressure on her arm.

"I do not think we were observed," Ryo told her. "You see, I am almost
positive they were not looking for us."

"Then what were they doing out here, at that altitude?" She noticed his
oddly rigid posture. "Is something else wrong?"

"Very wrong." Memories rose up, threatened to sub­merge all other
thoughts. Fear and anger mixed inside him. "Those weren't Thranx ships.
Those were AAnn warshut­tles. I know, because I've seen them before."

"We've got to help." Sanchez glared around at the hast­ily assembled
conference. They were in the shuttle's cargo hold, which had been
converted to a conference chamber, among other things.

"It's not our business to get involved in local squabbles," the military
attache reminded them perfunctorily. "We're here uninvited. Our presence
constitutes a dangerous pro­vocation to the Thranx government. There is
also the Pro­ject to consider. We could not assist the local colonists
without revealing our presence, and that in turn would surely spell an
end to our highly promising experiments here." He gazed coolly down
toward Ryo.

"Personal feelings must not be allowed to divert us from our principal
reason for being here. We have no formal relations with the Thranx. The
same is true for the AAnn. I have no basis for initiating hostilities
against a neutral and uncontacted alien race."

"You'll pardon me if I disagree with that." Sanchez gave him a wan
smile. "I've established to my satisfaction that it was the AAnn who,
deliberately and unprovoked, attacked the /Seeker. I /had many killed
and several wounded. I'd call that ample provocation for, at the
minimum, an instructive reprisal."

"The attack on your ship could have arisen from misun­derstanding," the
attache argued. He didn't enjoy the posi­tion he was forced to take, but
he defended it admirably. "We could be jeopardizing any future
relationships with the AAnn race."

"Your pardon, sir." One of the xenologists at the far end of the room
raised a timorous hand. "If these AAnn con­form to the psychosocial
pattern diagrammed by my pro­gramming, then we stand the best chance of
making a peace with them by showing a willingness to fight."

"That's crazy," the attache snapped.

"An apt AAnn adjective," said Ryo, whose knowledge of Terranglo speech
had progressed to an appreciation of alliteration.

"Their profile fits, however," the quiet specialist said with some
conviction.

The attache, outgunned, withdrew into silence.

"You must, of course, make your own decision based on the knowledge you
have and your own customs," Ryo said gently. "I am under no such
restraints. I must take my harvester and render whatever assistance I
can, regardless of personal risk. Besides, there is little you could
accom­plish. For one thing, you have no satisfactory ground
trans­portation. For another, you do not have-'

"I'm afraid that we do, Ryo," Sanchez informed him. The Thranx made an
instinctive gesture of fourth?degree astonishment.

"I know this was designed to be a wholly peaceful mis­sion," she
continued, "and it should remain so with regard to human?Thranx
relations. But considering our former im­prisonment, surely you can
understand that we wouldn't set down on a Thranx planet unarmed."

"No." Ryo tried to conceal his considerable upset. "I do not understand
that."

The captain shrugged. "I'm sorry. Regardless, it remains that we have
weapons." She gazed around the room. "I propose that we use them to
demonstrate our mental con­stitution to the AAnn, and to aid our
newfound friends. Informally, it would seem." She focused her attention
on the attache. "of course, I cannot give the order to release weaponry
for use here."

The attache drummed his fingers on the arm of his chair. "I still
haven't heard a strong enough reason. It's insane to take up arms
against one race on behalf of an­other that we have no relations with."

"The whole experiment sounded insane when Ryo first proposed it," Bonnie
reminded him. "There's something else you haven't thought of. None of
you." Her gaze in­cluded Sanchez. "What of the larvae we've borrowed
from the Paszex Nursery? Their parents and clanmates are all back there.
If they're killed we'll have relations of a differ­ent sort to deal
with, far more complicated relations.

"Also, by assisting the locals we have a chance to insin­uate ourselves
into their good graces. That would greatly aid the Project." She looked
hard at the attache. "Not hinder or finish it, as you claim. I feel it's
time to take the next step, according to the Project programming. We
can't stay hidden here forever."

"A most succinct summation." Bhadravati smiled pleas­antly at the
attache. "I should very much like to have a gun, please. In the interest
of furthering the Project." This sentiment was echoed strongly by most
of the others in the chamber.

Ryo's feelings were confused. It was marvelous finally to have committed
the humans against the AAnn. He would rather have accomplished it under
different circumstances, in a different place, but the web of existence
had dictated it be in Paszex. He would cope.

At the same time, the presence of weapons on board the shuttle was a
discomfiting revelation. Not one had see fit to come forward to tell him
about it. Perhaps, he mused, because my reaction was anticipated.

In spite of the successes and accomplishments of the past months, had
Wuu in the final analysis been right all along? Were these strange
bipeds he had befriended really incur­ably warlike and violent? Or was
the presence of arms here merely an understandable human reaction and
precaution?

Dissection of philosophies would have to wait. All that mattered now was
getting to Paszex as rapidly as possible. The harvester could rush there
faster than the humans' shuttle, which had been made a part of the
landscape.

Of course, the AAnn ships might not be heading for Paszex. That would
spare him a lot of trouble.

Perhaps three dozen armed humans were ready and it was impossible to fit
them all inside the harvester. The ex­cess sat on top, clung to the
sides. Ryo thoughtfully set the interior thermostat at near freezing,
which his passengers found delightfully refreshing.

How long ago had he rumbled through the jungle in a survey crawler on a
similar mission, to try and disrupt an AAnn attack on his home? Surely,
if the AAnn were intent on Paszex again they would remember and post
guards around their shuttles. But they would be expecting only a
possible charge by agricultural machinery, not a heavily armed force of
aliens.

The military attache was present with his several asso­ciates. As
trained soldiers, they easily and immediately as­sumed command. Ryo
noticed how alert they appeared, how intense in posture and speech. That
worried him as much as the presence of weapons had.

He'd observed humans in a warlike state months ago, when Bonnie and the
lamented Loo had escaped from their military prison on northern Hivehom.
That he could under­stand. Then they'd been motivated by fear. He wasn't
sure what was motivating the humans now.

With the humans on top and sides hanging on tightly, Ryo gently put the
versatile harvester on lift. There was no point in trying to hug the
earth now, and they didn't have days in which to slog through the
jungle. On full hover he set the craft for Paszex.

They set down into the trees at a sufficient distance to keep them off
AAnn detection equipment. It took as long to negotiate the final short
stretch of jungle separating them from the hive fields as it had to
hover all the way from the glade.

The invaders had set down in a different orchard. As in the previous
nightmare, smoke was rising from ruined ven­tilators and intakes. For
some perverse reason the AAnn seemed to have selected Paszex as a test
hive for their in­imical soirees. Ryo had no idea how many small,
isolated hives on Willow?wane and other colony worlds had suf­fered
similar repeated attacks, but it was obvious that an alliance with the
humans was more necessary than his own government was willing to admit.

Distant explosions sounded from the direction of the hive. "We will
approach stealthily at first," Ryo was telling the military attache,
"and try to slip close to them. I found that if you threaten their
shuttles' engines they will?"

But the attache was already making loud mouth noises which even the
knowledgeable Ryo could not interpret. Then the humans fell like lice
from the sides and rear of the harvester, and were running remarkably
mobile zigzag patterns through the field of shoulder?high weoneon and asfi.

It's doubtful that their numbers would have overawed the well?trained
AAnn soldiery. On the other hand, the sight of several dozen alien
creatures waving alien devices as they charged from supposedly empty
jungle shrieking at the tops of their lungs and generally comporting
themselves like dangerous mental defectives would be enough to unset­tle
the most self?possessed warrior of any race.

The AAnn guards fired wildly and often blindly while the humans picked
their shots with surprising accuracy. Bonnie, Captain Sanchez, Dr.
Bhadravati, and all those whom Ryo had come to think of as peaceful,
gentle schol­ars were blasting away with an enthusiasm that made Ryo
feel very sad for them. He was no longer frightened of the possibilities
they presented. Fear had become pity.

They need us, these poor* *bipeds, he told himself. He watched as an
energy bolt seared the wingtip of ?one shut­tlecraft. They need us far
more than we need them. They are the ones who should be crying for alliance.

The earth erupted and he ducked below the harvester's roof for
protection. A shot had struck something more than volatile within the
body of the farther AAnn ship. It disin­tegrated in a storm of flaming
plastic and flying metal shards. The explosion knocked the other shuttle
over on its side, crumpling landing gear and one of the four wings.

Several of the humans had been shot, but the damage had been done. The
startled AAnn who had not perished grouped themselves into a surrender
formation, threw down their weapons, and linked arms in a gesture of
de­fiant submission. They glared through slit pupils at the pe­culiar
beings surrounding them.

Ryo watched and wondered what the commander of the AAnn base ship
orbiting somewhere above must be think­ing. He did not know if the AAnn
suffered from panic. Other AAnn were staggering from the intact
shuttlecraft. Those returning hastily from the underground corridors of
Paszex took note of the submission ceremony their fellows were
performing and joined in.

It was not until evening that it dawned on the invaders how greatly they
outnumbered their captors. By then it was too late to organize any
resistance. Besides, they had per­formed the submission ceremony.
Regardless of their an­ger, they had committed themselves. So they
contented themselves with much internal grumbling, intense study of the
alien victors, and disparaging comments about their of­ficers, who'd
mistaken strangeness for superiority.

By then the inhabitants of the stricken community had begun to emerge.
The local Servitors were joined by ordi­nary citizens who'd armed
themselves with utensils and manufacturing implements. The captured AAnn
regarded them with unconcealed disdain, their tails twitching
list­lessly as they shuffled about under the watchful gaze of the
humans. Meanwhile the hivefolk kept their distance, their curiosity
focused more on their fearful saviors than on the belligerent AAnn.

Eventually someone noticed Ryo standing among and conversing with the
bipeds. He reluctantly made his way to the strangely garbed Thranx,
striving to get no nearer the monstrous aliens than was absolutely
necessary.

"I am Kerarilzex," the Elder announced. His antennae were withered, but
not his voice. "I am Six on the Hive Council of Eight. We would give our
thanks to these pecu­liar visitors"?he'd been about to use the Thranx
word for monster and at the last minute thought better of it "but I
would not know how to do so. It appears you can converse with them."
Then he made a slow gesture of third?degree uncertainty coupled with one
of rising amazement. "I believe?I believe I may know you, youngster. Can
it be that you are of the Zex?"

"I am called Ryozenzuzex, Elder."

"The young agricultural expert who vanished so long ago. Truly do I
remember you!" He paused, thinking fu­riously. "Word came to us all the
way from Ciccikalk that you had become something of a dangerous renegade."

"Something of that, yes. I am a renegade from and dan­ger to the blind,
the callous, and the reactionary. No one else has anything to fear from
me." Now that the AAnn had been neutralized, other problems?in their own
fashion more serious?were beginning to resurface.

"Rest deep and warm, Elder. Neither I nor my friends," and he indicated
the monsters, "are any threat to the hive. The contrary is true. All
will be explained." I hope, he add silently. "All that matters is what I
have accom­plished in my absence."

Bonnie had walked over to stand next to him. She was gazing with
interest at the Elder, who found the attention very upsetting.

"Who are these ... creatures, and how have you come to be among them?"
he asked.

"It's a long story," Bonnie said via the appropriate whis­tles and clicks.

The Elder was flabbergasted. Reflexively, he threw back a stream of
questions.

"I don't understand," she told him patiently. "You'll have to speak more
slowly. I'm not very fluent yet."

Ryo translated the rough places for both of them. The Elder's active
mind was homing in on another unsettling thought.

"We thank you for our hive's salvation. I think we will be safe from
AAnn depredations from now on. Would you by any chance know what
happened to six children who were taken from the Nursery several months
ago? Their Nurse vanished with them. A heinous crime."

"And a necessary one, I'm afraid." Ryo was past caring what local Elders
thought. Having broken so many impor­tant laws in a comparatively brief
span he had no com­punction at mentioning yet another perfidy.

"The Nurse Falmiensazex had nothing to do with the dis­appearance." He
had to hesitate before he could go on. "She lies in a comasleep. That
was my fault. It was also neces­sary."

The Elder was watching him shrewdly. "You call it nec­essary, yet you
show signs of remorse."

"She is?was?my premate."

"Ah." The council member was trying to sort events in his mind. "And the
larvae?"

"All are well, healthy, and maturing." In areas you can't begin to
imagine, he added silently.

"There will have to be an adjudication, of course," mur­mured the Elder.

"Of course."

"What are they talking about?" Bonnie asked him.

"My most recent crimes. I will have to surrender myself soon to
confinement."

Bonnie hefted her rifle. "Not if you don't want to, you won't. You're
too valuable, too important to the Project to languish in some cell
while we try and muddle through first contact without you, Ryo."

"I assure you everything will turn out all right." He put first a
truhand and then a foothand on her arm. "A society functions because its
citizens choose to abide by its laws."

"That sounds funny coming from you."

"So I am selective." There was no accompanying gesture of humor. Bonnie
wondered if that was for the benefit of the watchful Elder.

"The matter must be discussed, Bonnie. It will take time."

As it turned out, it did not.

An echo of the thunder they'd hidden from earlier now rose out of the
south. It grew to deafening proportions as half a dozen sleek
shuttlecraft passed low overhead. They commenced a wide turn that would
bring them circling back toward Paszex.

Bonnie and the other humans had a bad moment until they noticed the loud
and clearly celebratory reaction of the hivefolk. "Our ships," Ryo told
her in response to the unasked question.

"Late again," muttered the Elder Kerarilzex, "but at least in force this
time. I hope others caught the command ship before it could flee orbit.
Words will be composed," he added darkly. "This is the fifth time in the
last seventy years. Other hives endure worse. I do not believe the
peo­ple will stand for it much longer."

"And well you shouldn't," Bonnie agreed in passable Low Thranx.

 

The Thranx commanding officer, of the fifteenth rank, had stared through
his compensating viewer as his modest armada passed low over the site of
Paszex. He made mental note of the two ruined AAnn warshuttles, the
cluster of AAnn prisoners, the armed hivefolk, and the astonishing
aliens in their midst.

There was no immediate way of ascertaining which side the horrific
bipeds were on. He could not fire on them since they were mixed in with
the hivefolk. It was very frustrating.

The military of both species were livid. The bureaucrats were most
upset. The politicians were confused and angry. The scientists were
disturbed.

Each group had dreamed of holding center, stage when an intelligent,
space?traversing race was contacted. Instead, the moment of glory had
been usurped by some secretive researchers, a mutinous human crew, and
an outcast alien agriculturalist.

There were pains and problems. The parents of the boys and girls who'd
traveled to Willow?wane as part of the Pro­ject did their best to muster
a feeling of betrayal. True, they had agreed to commit their children to
Project control in return for a year of free room, board, and education,
but to some of them the whole business still seemed like kid­naping.
None had thought to inquire as to the precise loca­tion of the Project
school or its distance from their homes.

The idea of lifting a group of impressionable youngsters and then
plunking them down among a bunch of pale wormlike monsters grated
against the public conscience. No one, of course, gave a thought to the
effect the children might have had on the impressionable Thranx larvae.

The Thranx populace had an advantage because it had already been exposed
to two semi?intelligent species and the AAnn. It was their highly
developed sense of propriety that suffered most. Events had not unfolded
according to care­fully prepared procedures. When procedure was
violated­ well, the Thranx were very strong on organization and rather
less so at improvisation, and you simply did not im­provise first
contact with an alien race.

There was also the matter of larval abduction. Unlike the humans, Ryo
did not have the permission of parents to enroll their offspring in the
Project school. His action was kidnapping, whatever the motives.

Ryo didn't care. He agreed with everything the adjudica­tors said. All
that mattered was the Project. Its apparent success was vindication
enough for him. None of the larvae had been harmed, physically or
mentally, by their experi­ence. The Nursery supervisors who attended
them could attest to that.

It's very hard to rouse public opinion against someone who politely
agrees with everything his prosecutors say while patiently awaiting
martyrdom.

His strongest condemnation carne not from government or public but from
Fal. Under proper care she recovered rapidly from her comasleep,
whereupon she laid into him far more devastatingly than any hivemother.
Against her list of outrages he could offer only one thought in his
de­fense: the fact that he had succeeded.

As to the avowed success of the Project, even the most jingoistic member
of either species could not deny the evi­dence. Not only did the Thranx
larvae and human children tolerate each other, they had grown nearly
inseparable. Monster played happily alongside monster.

Recordings showing human children gamboling with their Thranx
counterparts rapidly dispelled the initial out­cry that had arisen on
Earth and her colonies. How can something be considered a monster when a
seven?year?old girl with pigtails can ride it bareback, or a couple of
boys can tussle with it in a sandpile and all three are obviously having
a wonderful time?

Reaction among the Thranx was, in accord with their nature, somewhat
slower in forming. Grudging acceptance began to appear when chips
revealed that the horribly flexi­ble alien adolescents had no intention
of butchering and barbecuing their larval companions.

A major ticklish problem was partially resolved when the Radical
Agnostic theologians of Earth discovered their ex­act counterparts among
the Aesthetic Philosopher sect of Hivehom. They answered the nervous and
awkward ques­tion raised by many as to which side the Deity might be on
by proclaiming that he was most likely sitting back and watching the
whole business with considerable amusement.

Twenty years would pass before the first treaties were drawn and more
than that before the boldest among both species brought up the specter
of Amalgamation. For the time being, preliminary agreements were
sufficient. They were attested to and duly recorded by wary officials on
both sides whose hands had been forced, not by strength of arms or
superior intellectual power, but by children cavort­ing in a playroom.

Ryo was formally relieved of his long?neglected agricul­tural duties and
assigned to the permanent contact group. This was placed outside Paszex,
which now assumed an importance beyond the export of vegetable products
and handicrafts. Many of the latter, incidentally, were traded to the
humans of the Project. Once again the pioneers had stolen a march on the
official planners. Trade had begun.

The airfield was hastily enlarged so it could handle shut­tlecraft.
First official visitors were exchanged, and as a few handicrafts and
mechanisms traversed the gulf be­tween the stars, it was discovered that
the profit motive was another characteristic human and Thranx shared.

So it was that contact was not forged so much as hastily cobbled
together. But it was a beginning, the most impor­tant part of understanding.

Even Fal eventually reconciled with her now famous premate, though he
was still regarded as a traitor among some of his own kind and an enemy
spy in certain unre­lentingly paranoid human circles. Wuuzelansem was
brought from Ciccikalk, still suspicious of humankind but more flexible
than most Thranx. His conversion came rap­idly when some of the humans
became fluent enough to admire his poetry.

"I don't know how we did without them for so long," he once muttered to
Ryo after a recital. "Their appreciation of true art seems as boundless
as their enthusiasm. The gov­ernment may acquire an ally, but I have
acquired something far more valuable."

"Which is?"

"A new audience!" and Wuu returned to the display chamber to acknowledge
the humans' peculiar form of ap­plause.

 

Ten years passed. A day arrived when several of the original Project
members had to return to their homes. Two would travel to Centaurus, one
to New Riviera, and several to Earth.

Jahan Bhadravati was one of them. Bonnie was another. They stood next to
the Paszex shuttleport's human?service area, still clad in Willow?wane
duty uniform, which was to say practically nothing, and waited for
departure call. It was a lovely rnidseason day. The temperature was 35°
C and the humidity hovered near 92 percent.

No officials saw them off with speeches. In the inter­vening decade the
coming and going of humans at Paszex had ceased to be worthy of special
notice. There was a fare­well party, however. Ryozenzuzex was there,
accompa­nied by a young Thranx adult named Qul and a tall, skinny human
named Wilson Asambi. They were working together to help develop gentler
strains of a hybrid fruit.

Bonnie took a last look around the surface of Willow-­wane. The distant
lines of orchard and jungle, the little thickets of air?intake stacks,
the shuttleway, all were old friends to be left behind but retained in
memory. She looked much the same as she had when she'd first set foot on
Willow?wane ten years before. The world was a fine place for keeping
fit. There was gray in her hair now, and contentment in her expression.

"I suppose you'll continue at your post," she said to Ryo.

He shrugged, a human gesture that was becoming quite popular among
Thranx, and uttered a confirmatory whistle of agreement. He reflected on
the gesture and its meaning. We give so much to each other, he thought.
Gesture as well as science, habit as well as art. Especially poetry. He
smiled inwardly. Two years ago, old Wuuzelansem had fled to wherever it
was old poets retreated to, fighting and kicking and disparaging the
state of the universe all the way, but not before he'd seen his poetry
wildly praised by the very monsters he'd once sought to avoid contact with.

Ryo missed Wuu. Even if they hadn't seen ommatidia to ommatidia all the
time.

A high?pitched whistle sounded from behind. Fal was waiting near the
entryway to Paszex: She still would not have close contact with humans.
Her trauma was under­standable, since they'd been responsible for luring
her pre­mate away and forcing him to strike her. She would barely
tolerate them.

Toleration first, he told himself. Friendship later. If any­thing,
progress on the latter was ahead of schedule.

To his surprise, he noticed that Bonnie was making eye moisture. Ryo
waited to find out whether it was significant of happiness or distress.
Water of delight, water of depres­sion, Wuu had called it in one of his
poems.

"I'm crying out of both," she told him. "I'm glad that things have
turned out so well and I'm sad that after all these years it's finally
time to leave. I just can't turn down a university position on Earth.
Loo?Loo would have liked the way things have turned out."

"There's still a lot of work to be done," Ryo said. "I'll retain my
position as long as I'm able to help."

Bhadravati shuffled his feet and said nothing. Conversa­tion had never
been the scientist's strong point, Ryo knew. He felt a great sadness
within himself at the coming depar­ture of two of his oldest human friends.

"There is no reason to cry, my friend," Ryo told Bonnie. "We have
nothing but reason for happiness. We shall meet again someday."

Bonnie was too much of a realist to believe that. Cir­cumstance and
distance, the ancient enemies of acquain­tance, would conspire to
prevent it.

Nevertheless she replied with a smiling, "I hope so, Ryo," as she
reached out both hands to touch the tips of his proffered antennae. The
interspecies gesture was now as automatic as a handshake. Ryo repeated
the gesture with Bhadravati.

"These youngsters here," he said, indicating Asambi and Qul, "will be
taking on the truly important work now. Nothing can prevent the
deepening of our friendship." She was still crying and he made a gesture
of gentle third­degree admonishment.

"Please, friend, let there be no more tears at this parting. Not water
tears from you nor crystal tears from me, would that I were able to
manufacture them. It's a gesture I envy you. A small but intriguing
physical difference."

"The only significant differences between us anymore are physical," said
Bhadravati.

"Only physical," Ryo agreed, "and that means less each day. Shape and
composition mean nothing when understanding is present."

"I thought old Wuu was the poet and not you," Bonnie said.

"A little of everything you admire eventually rubs off on you. I'm sure
you'll be happy to live for a while now with less weighty matters on
your mind."

"Well, I will have my classes," she admitted, "and Jahan his research
and his books to compose." From the way they gazed at one another Ryo
thought Bonnie might mate after all. The soft beeping sounded from
around them. Other passengers began to move toward the waiting shuttle.
Not all of them were human.

"We should board." Bhadravati put a hand on her shoul­der. She nodded,
didn't?speak, looked back down at Ryo. Then she reached out and hugged
him. Blue?green chiton slid against soft flesh. It was another gesture
Ryo had learned but which he'd always observed performed by two humans.
It was much too rough to be civilized, but he po­litely said nothing.

As they moved toward the shuttle he made the human gesture of farewell,
waving two hands at them. He followed with the far more complex and
subtle four?handed gesture of Thranx good?bye. At the base of the ramp
Bonnie imi­tated it as best she could with only two hands. Then they
disappeared into the ship.

He started toward the burrow entryway that led down into the busy
terminal. The impatient Fal had withdrawn into the comforting confines
below.

Bonnie and Dr. Bhadravati appeared content, and that thought made him
happy. Everyone deserved contentment. They'd worked hard and long and
deserved their share of mental peace.

The fruit he'd struggled so hard to plant had taken root. It had done
more than survive. In ten years it prospered enormously and now showed
signs of flowering into some­thing far more than he'd ever dreamed of,
more than mere friendship. The relationship between human and thranx was
becoming more than deep. There were signs, signs and portents, that
someday in the far future it could become truly symbiotic.

And there was another benefit, one Ryo had not con­sidered. One he
hadn't thought much about during the last busy, exciting ten years. The
realization came as a shock.

He found something useful to do with his life after all.

 

*******************************************************

Note: Map of the Commonwealth and its Chronology Published in 05: Flinx
in Flux

*******************************************************

 

ALAN DEAN FOSTER was born in New York City in 1946 and raised in Los
Angeles, California. After receiving a bachelor's degree in political
science and a master of fine arts degree in motion pictures from UCLA in
1968?69, he worked for two years as a public relations copywriter in
Studio City, California.

 

He sold his first short story to August Derleth at Arkham Collector
Magazine in 1968, and other sales of short fiction to other magazines
followed. His first try at a novel, The Tar?Aiym Krang, was published by
Ballantine Books in 1972. Since then, Foster has published many short
stories, novels, and film novelizations.

 

Foster has toured extensively around the world. Besides traveling, he
enjoys classical and rock music, old films, basketball, body surfing,
and weightlifting. He has taught screenwriting, literature, and film
history at UCLA and Los Angeles City College.

 

Currently he resides in Arizona.

 

