Farnham's Freehold

 

 

Chapter 1

 

 

 

     "It's not a hearing aid," Hubert Farnham explained. "It's a radio,
tuned to the emergency frequency."

     Barbara Wells stopped with a bite halfway to her mouth. "Mr.
Farnham! You think they are going to attack?"

     Her host shrugged. "The Kremlin doesn't let me in on its secrets."

     His son said, "Dad, quit scaring the ladies. Mrs. Wells-"

     "Call me 'Barbara.' I'm going to ask the court to let me drop the
'Mrs.'

     "You don't need permission."

     "Watch it, Barb," his sister Karen said. "Free advice is expensive."

     "Shaddap. Barbara, with all respect to my worthy father, he sees
spooks. There is not going to be a war."

     "I hope you're right," Barbara Wells said soberly. "Why do you
think so?"

     "Because the communists are realists. They never risk a war that
would hurt them, even if they could win. So they won't risk one they
can't win."

     "Then I wish," his mother said, "that they would stop having these
dreadful crises. Cuba. All that fuss about Berlin-as if anybody cared!
And now this. It makes a person nervous. Joseph!"

     "Yes, ma'am?"

     "You fetch me coffee. And brandy. Café royale."

     "Yes, ma'am." The houseboy, a young Negro, removed her plate,
barely touched.

     Young Farnham said, "Dad, it's not these phony crises that has
Mother upset; it's the panicky way you behave. You must stop it."

     "No."

     "You must! Mother didn't eat her dinner . . . and all because of
that silly button in your ear. You can't-"

     "Drop it, Duke."

     "Sir?"

     "When you moved into your own apartment, we agreed to live as
friends. As my friend your opinions are welcome. But that does not make
you free to interfere between your mother-my wife-and myself."

     His wife said, "Now, Hubert."

     "Sorry, Grace."

     "You're too harsh on the boy. It does make me nervous."

     "Duke is not a boy. And I've done nothing to make you nervous. Sorry."

     "I'm sorry, too, Mother. But if Dad regards it as interference,
well-" Duke forced a grin. "I'll have to find a wife of my own to annoy.
Barbara, will you marry me?"

     "No, Duke."

     "I told you she was smart, Duke," his sister volunteered.

     "Karen, pipe down. Why not, Barbara? I'm young, I'm healthy. Why,
someday I might even have clients. In the meantime you can support us."

     "No, Duke. I agree with your father."

     "Huh?"

     "I should say that my father agrees with your father. I don't know
that my pops is carrying around a radio tonight but I'm certain that he
is listening to one. Duke, every car in our family has a survival kit."

     "No fooling!"

     "My car out in your father's driveway, the one Karen and I drove
down from school, has a kit in its trunk that Pops picked before I
re-entered college. Pops takes it seriously, so I do."

     Duke Farnham opened his mouth, closed it. His father asked,
"Barbara, what did your father select?"

     "Oh, lots of things. Ten gallons of water. Food. A jeep can of
gasoline. Medicines. A sleeping bag. A gun-"

     "Can you use a gun?"

     "Pops made me learn. A shovel. An ax. Clothes. Oh, yes, a radio.
But the important thing was 'Where?'-so he kept saying. If I were at
school, he would expect me to head for the basement of the gym. But
here- Pops would expect me to head up into the mountains."

     "You won't need to."

     "Sir?"

     "Dad means," explained Karen, "that you are welcome in our panic hole."

     Barbara showed a questioning look. Her host said, "Our bomb
shelter. 'Farnham's Folly' my son calls it. I think you would be safer
there than you would be running for the hills-despite the fact that we
are only ten miles from a MAMMA Base. If an alarm comes, we'll duck into
it. Right, Joseph?"

     "Yes, sir! That way I stay on your payroll."

     "The hell you do. You're fired the instant the sirens sound-and I
start charging you rent."

     "Do I pay rent, too?" asked Barbara.

     "You wash dishes. Everybody does. Even Duke."

     "Count me out," Duke said grimly.

     "Eh? Not that many dishes, Son."

     "I'm not joking, Dad. Khrushchev said he would bury us- and you're
making it come true. I'm not going to crawl into a hole in the ground!"

     "As you wish, sir."

     "Sonny boy!" His mother put down her cup. "If an attack comes, of
course you're going into the shelter!" She blinked back tears. "Promise
Mother."

     Young Farnham looked stubborn, then sighed. "All right. If an
attack comes- if an alarm sounds, I mean; there isn't going to be an
attack- I'll go into your panic hole. But, Dad, this is just to soothe
Mother's nerves."

     "Nevertheless you are welcome."

     "Okay. Let's go into the living room and break out the cards-with a
firm understanding that we drop the subject. Suits?"

     "Agreed." His father got up and offered his arm to his wife. "My dear?"

     In the living room, Grace Farnham declined to play bridge. "No,
dear, I'm too upset. You play with the young people, and- Joseph!
Joseph, bring me just a teensy bit more coffee. Royale, I mean. Don't
look that way, Hubert; it helps, you know it does."

     "Would you like a Miltown, dear?"

     "I don't need drugs. I'll just have a drop more coffee."

     They cut for partners; Duke shook his head sadly. "Poor Barbara!
Stuck with Dad- Did you warn her, Sis?"

     "Keep your warnings to yourself," his father advised.

     "She's entitled to know, Dad. Barbara, that juvenile delinquent
across from you is as optimistic in contract as he is pessimistic
in-well, in other matters. Watch out for psychic bids. If he has a
Yarborough-"

     "Drop dead, Duke. Barbara, what system do you prefer? Italian?"

     Her eyes widened. "The only Italian I know is vermouth, Mr.
Farnham. I play Goren. Nothing fancy, I just try to go by the book."

     "'By the book,'" Hubert Farnham agreed.

     "'By the book,'" his son echoed. "Which book? Dad likes to ring in
the Farmers' Almanac, especially when you're vulnerable, doubled and
redoubled. Then he'll point out how, if you had led diamonds-"

     "Counselor," his father interrupted, "will you deal those cards? Or
shall I stuff them down your throat?"

     "I'll go quietly. Put a little blood in it? A cent a point?"
Barbara said hastily, "That's steep for me."

     Duke answered, "You gals aren't in it. Just Dad and myself. That's
how I pay my office rent."

     "Duke means," his father corrected, "that is how he gets deep into
debt to his old man. I was beating him out of his allowance when he was
still in junior high."

     Barbara shut up and played cards. The stakes made her tense, even
though it was not her money. Her nervousness was increased by suspicion
that her partner was a match player.

     Her nerves relaxed, though not her care, as it began to appear that
Mr. Farnham found her bidding satisfactory. But she welcomed the rest
that came from being dummy. She spent these vacations studying Hubert
Farnham.

     She decided that she liked him, for the way he handled his family
and for the way he played bridge-quietly, thoughtfully, exact in
bidding, precise and sometimes brilliant in play. She admired the way he
squeezed out the last trick, of a contract in which she had forced them
too high, by having the boldness to sluff an ace.

     She knew that Karen expected her to pair off with Duke this weekend
and admitted that it seemed reasonable. Duke was as handsome as Karen
was pretty-and a catch . . . rising young lawyer, a year older than
herself, with a fresh and disarming wolfishness.

     She wondered if he expected to make out with her? Did Karen expect
it and was she watching, secretly amused?

     Well, it wasn't going to happen! She did not mind admitting that
she was a one-time loser but she resented the assumption that any
divorcee was available. Damn it, she hadn't been in bed with anybody
since that dreadful night when she had packed and left. Why did people
think- Duke was looking at her; she locked eyes with him, blushed, and
looked away, looked at his father instead.

     Mr. Farnham was fiftyish, she decided. And looked it. Hair thinning
and already gray, himself thin, almost gaunt, but with a slight
potbelly, tired eyes, lines around them, and deep lines down his cheeks.
Not handsome- With sudden warmth she realized that if Duke Farnham had
half the strong masculine charm his father had, a panty girdle wouldn't
be much protection. She dismissed it by being quickly angry with Grace
Farnham. What excuse did a woman have for being an incipient alcoholic,
fretful and fat and self-indulgent, when she had this man?

     The thought was chased away by realization that Mrs. Farnham was
what Karen might become. Mother and daughter looked alike, save that
Karen had not gone to pot. Barbara did not like this thought. She liked
Karen better than any other sorority sister she had found when she went
back to finish college. Karen was sweet and generous and gay- But
perhaps Grace Farnham had been so, once. Did women have to become
fretful and useless?

     Hubert Farnham looked up from the last trick. "Three spades, game
and rubber. Well bid, partner."

     She flushed again. "Well played, you mean. I invited too much."

     "Not at all. At worst we would have been down one. If you don't
bet, you can't win. Karen, has Joseph gone to bed?"

     "Studying. He's got a quiz."

     "I thought we might invite him to cut in. Barbara, Joseph is the
best player in this house-always audacity at the right time. Plus the
fact that he is studying to be an accountant and never forgets a card.
Karen, can you find us something without disturbing Joseph?"

     "'Spect ah kin, Boss. Vodka and tonic for you?"

     "And munching food."

     "Come on, Barbara. Let's bottle."

     Hubert Farnham watched them go, while thinking it was a shame that
so nice a child as Mrs. Wells should have had a sour marriage. A sound
game of bridge and a good disposition- Gangly and horse faced, perhaps-
But a nice smile and a mind of her own. If Duke had any gumption-

     But Duke didn't have any. He went to where his wife was nodding by
the television receiver, and said, "Grace? Grace darling, ready for
bed?"-then helped her into her bedroom.

     When he came back, he found his son alone. He sat down and said,
"Duke, I'm sorry about that difference of opinion at dinner."

     "That? Oh, forget it."

     "I would rather have your respect than your tolerance. I know that
you disapprove of my 'panic hole.' But we have never discussed why I
built it."

     "What is there to discuss? You think the Soviet Union is going to
attack. You think that hole in the ground will save your life. Both
ideas are unhealthy. Sick. Especially unhealthy for Mother. You are
driving her to drink. I don't like it. I liked it still less to have you
remind me-me, a lawyer!-that I must not interfere between husband and
wife." Duke started to get up. "I'll be going."

     "Please, Son! Doesn't the defense get a chance?"

     "Uh- All right, all right!" Duke sat down.

     "I respect your opinions. I don't share them but many people do.
Perhaps most people, since most Americans have made no effort to save
themselves. But on the points you made, you are mistaken. I don't expect
the USSR to attack- and I doubt if our shelter is enough to save our lives."

     "Then why go around with that plug in your ear scaring Mother out
of her wits?"

     "I've never had an automobile accident. But I carry auto insurance.
That shelter is my insurance policy."

     "But you just said it wouldn't save your life!"

     "No, I said I doubted that it would be enough. It could save our
lives if we lived a hundred miles away. But Mountain Springs is a prime
target . . . and no citizen can build anything strong enough to stop a
direct hit."

     "Then why bother?"

     "I told you. The best insurance I can afford. Our shelter won't
stop a direct hit. But it will stand up to a near miss-and Russians
aren't supermen and rockets are temperamental. I've minimized the risk.
That's the best I can do."

     Duke hesitated. "Dad, I can't be diplomatic."

     "Then don't try."

     "So I'll be blunt. Do you have to ruin Mother's life, turn her into
a lush, just on the chance that a hole in the ground will let you live a
few years longer? Will it be worth while to be alive-afterwards-with the
country devastated and all your friends dead?"

     "Probably not."

     "Then why?"

     "Duke, you aren't married."

     "Obviously."

     "Son, I must be blunt myself. It has been years since I've had any
real interest in staying alive. You are grown and on your own, and your
sister is a grown woman, even though she is still in school. As for
myself-" He shrugged. "The most satisfying thing left is the fiddling
pleasure of a game of bridge. As you are aware, there isn't much
companionship left in my marriage."

     "I am aware, all right. But it's your fault. You're crowding Mother
into a nervous breakdown."

     "I wish it were that simple. In the first place- You were at law
school when I built the shelter, during that Berlin crisis. Your mother
perked up and stayed sober. She would take a martini and let it go at
that-instead of four as she did tonight. Duke, Grace wants that shelter."

     "Well-maybe so. But you aren't soothing her by trotting around with
that plug in your ear."

     "Perhaps not. But I have no choice."

     "What do you mean?"

     "Grace is my wife, Son. 'To love and to cherish' includes keeping
her alive if I can. That shelter may keep her alive. But only if she is
in it. How much warning today? Fifteen minutes, if we're lucky. But
three minutes could be time enough to get her into the shelter. But if I
don't hear the alert, I won't have three minutes. So I listen. During
any crisis."

     "Suppose it happens when you are asleep?"

     His father smiled. "If the news is bad, I sleep with this button
taped into my ear. When it's really bad-as it is tonight- Grace and I
sleep in the shelter. The girls will be urged to sleep there. And you
are invited."

     "Not likely!"

     "I didn't think so."

     "Dad, stipulating that an attack is possible-merely stipulating, as
the Russians aren't crazy-why build a shelter smack on a target? Why
don't you pick a place far from any target, build there-again
stipulating that Mother needs one for her nerves, which may be true-and
get Mother off the sauce?"

     Hubert Farnham sighed. "Son, she won't have it. This is her home."

     "Make her!"

     "Duke, have you ever tried to make a woman do anything she really
didn't want to do? Besides that, a weakness for the sauce-hell, growing
alcoholism-is not that simple. I must cope with it as best I can.
However- Duke, I told you that I did not have much reason to stay alive.
But I do have one reason."

     "Such as?"

     "If those lying, cheating bastards ever throw their murder weapons
at the United States, I want to live long enough to go to hell in
style-with eight Russian side boys!"

     Farnham twisted in his chair. "I mean it, Duke. America is the best
thing in history, I think, and if those scoundrels kill our country, I
want to kill a few of them. Eight side boys. Not less. I felt relieved
when Grace refused to consider moving."

     "Why, Dad?"

     "Because I don't want that pig-faced peasant with the manners of a
pig to run me out of my home! I'm a free man. I intend to stay free.
I've made every preparation I can. But I wouldn't relish running away.
I- Here come the girls."

     Karen came in carrying drinks, followed by Barbara. "Hi! Barb got a
look at our kitchen and decided to make crêpes Suzettes. Why are you two
looking grim? More bad news?"

     "No, but if you will snap the television on, we might get part of
the ten o'clock roundup. Barbara, those glorified pancakes smell
wonderful. Want a job as a cook?"

     "What about Joseph?"

     "We'll keep Joseph as housekeeper."

     "I accept."

     Duke said, "Hey! You refused my offer of honorable matrimony and
turn around and agree to live in sin with my old man. How come?"

     "I didn't hear 'sin' mentioned."

     "Don't you know? Barbara. . . Dad is a notorious sex criminal."

     "Is this true, Mr. Farnham?"

     "Well. . ."

     "That's why I studied law, Barbara. It was breaking us to bring
Jerry Giesler all the way from Los Angeles every time Dad got into a jam."

     "Those were the good old days!" Duke's father agreed. "But,
Barbara, that was years ago. Contract is my weakness now."

     "In that case I would expect a higher salary-"

     "Hush, children!" Karen said forcefully. She turned up the sound:

     "-agreed in principal to three out of four of the President's major
points and has agreed to meet again to discuss the fourth point, the
presence of their nuclear submarines in our coastal waters. It may now
be safely stated that the crisis, the most acute in post-World-War-Two
years, does seem to be tapering oft to a mutual accommodation that both
countries can live with. We pause to bring you exciting news from
General Motors followed by an analysis in depth-"

     Karen turned it down. Duke said, "Just as I said, Dad. You can take
that cork out of your ear."

     "Later. I'm busy with crêpes Suzettes. Barbara, I'll expect these
for breakfast every morning."

     "Dad, quit trying to seduce her and cut the cards. I want to win
back what I've lost."

     "That'll be a long night." Mr. Farnham~ finished eating, stood up
to put his plate aside; the doorbell rang. "I'll answer it."

     He went to the door, returned shortly. Karen said, "Who was it,
Daddy? I cut for you. You and I are partners. Look pleased."

     "I'm delighted. But remember that a count of eleven is not an
opening bid. Somebody lost, I guess. Possibly a nut."

     "My date. You scared him off."

     "Possibly. A baldheaded old coot, very weather-beaten and ragged."

     "My date," Karen confirmed. "President of the Dekes. Go get him,
Daddy."

     "Too late. He took one look at me and fled. Whose bid is it?"

     Barbara continued to try to play like a machine. But it seemed to
her that Duke was overbidding; she found herself thereby bidding timidly
and had to force herself to overcome it. They went set several times in
a long, dreary rubber which they "won" but lost on points.

     It was a pleasure to lose the next rubber with Karen as her
partner. They shifted and again she was Mr. Farnham's partner. He smiled
at her. "This time we clobber them!"

     "I'll try."

     "Just play as you did. By the book. Duke will supply the mistakes."

     "Put your money where your mouth is, Dad. Want a side bet of a
hundred dollars on this rubber?"

     "A hundred it is."

     Barbara thought about seventeen lonely dollars in her purse and got
nervous. She was still more nervous when the first hand ended at five
clubs, bid and made-by Duke-and realized that he had overbid and would
have been down one had she covered his finesse.

     Duke said, "Care to double that bet, Governor?"

     "Okay. Deal."

     Her morale was bolstered by the second hand: her contract at four
spades and made possible by voids; she was able to ruff before cleaning
out trumps. Her partner's smile was reward enough. But it left her shaky.

     Duke said, "Both teams vulnerable, no part score. How's your blood
pressure, Daddy-o? Double again?"

     "Planning on firing your secretary?"

     "Speak up, or accept a white feather."

     "Four hundred. You can sell your car."

     Mr. Farnham dealt. Barbara picked up her hand and frowned. The
count was not bad-two queens, a couple of jacks, an ace, a king-but no
biddable suit and the king was unguarded. It was a strength and
distribution which she had long tagged as "just good enough to go set
on." She hoped that it would be one of those sigh-of-relief hands in
which everyone passes.

     Her partner picked up his hand and glanced at it. "Three no trump."

     Barbara repressed a gasp, Karen did gasp. "Daddy, are you feverish?"

     "Bid."

     "Pass!"

     Barbara said to herself, "'God oh god, what I do now?" Her
partner's bid promised twenty-five points-and invited slam. She held
thirteen points. Thirty-eight points in the two hands-grand slam.

     That's what the book said! Barbara girl, "three no trump" is
twenty-five, twenty-six, or twenty-seven points-add thirteen and it
reads "Grand Slam."

     But was Mr. Farnham playing by the book? Or was he bidding a
shut-out to grab the rubber and nail down that preposterous bet?

     If she passed, then game and rubber-and four hundred dollars-was
certain. But grand slam (if they made it) was, uh, around fifteen
dollars at the stakes Duke and his father were playing. Risk four
hundred dollars of her partner's money against a chance of fifteen?
Ridiculous!

     Could she sneak up on it with the Blackwood Convention? No,
no!-there hadn't been background bidding.

     Was this one of those bids Duke had warned her about?

     (But her partner had said, "Play by the book.")

     "Seven no trump," she said firmly.

     Duke whistled. "Thanks, Barbara. We're ganging up on you, Dad. Double."

     "Pass."

     "Pass," Karen echoed.

     Barbara again counted her hand. That singleton king looked awfully
naked. But . . . either the home team had thirty-eight points-or it
didn't. "Redouble."

     Duke grinned. "Thanks, sweetie pie. Your lead, Karen."

     Mr. Farnham put down his hand and abruptly left the table. His son
said, "Hey! Come back and take your medicine!"

     Mr. Farnham snapped on the television, moved on and switched on the
radio, changed its setting. "Red alert!" he snapped. "Somebody tell
Joseph!" He ran out of the room.

     "Come back! You can't duck this with that kind of stunt!"

     "Shut up, Duke!" Karen snapped.

     The television screen flickered into life: "-closing down. Tune at
once to your emergency station. Good luck, good-bye, and God bless you all!"

     As the screen went blank the radio cut in: "-not a drill. This is
not a drill. Take shelter. Emergency personnel report to their stations.
Do not go out on the street. If you have no shelter, stay in the best
protected room of your home. This is not a drill. Unidentified ballistic
objects have been radar sighted by our early-warning screens and it must
be assumed that they are missiles. Take shelter. Emergency personnel
report to their-"

     "He means it," Karen said in an awed voice. "Duke, show Barb where
to go. I'll wake Joseph." She ran out of the room.

     Duke said, "I don't believe it."

     "Duke, how do we get into the shelter?"

     "I'll show you." He stood up unhurriedly, picked up the hands, put
each in a separate pocket. "Mine and Sis's in my trousers, yours and
Dad's in my coat. Come on. Want your suitcase?"

     "No!"

 

 

Chapter 2

 

 

     Duke led her through the kitchen to the basement stairs. Mr.
Farnham was halfway down, his wife in his arms. She seemed asleep. Duke
snapped out of his attitude. "Hold it, Dad! I'll take her."

     "Get on down and open the door!"

     The door was steel set into the wall of the basement. Seconds were
lost because Duke did not know how to handle its latch. At last Mr.
Farnham passed his wife over to his son, opened it himself. Beyond,
stairs led farther down. They managed it by carrying Mrs. Farnham, hands
and feet, a limp doll, and took her through a second door into a room
beyond. Its floor was six feet lower than the basement and under,
Barbara decided, their back garden. She hung back while Mrs. Farnham was
carried inside.

     Mr. Farnham reappeared. "Barbara! Get in here! Where's Joseph?
Where's Karen?"

     Those two came rushing down the basement stairs as he spoke. Karen
was flushed and seemed excited and happy. Joseph was looking wild-eyed
and was dressed in undershirt and trousers, his feet bare.

     He stopped short. "Mr. Farnham! Are they going to hit us?"

     "I'm afraid so. Get inside."

     The young Negro turned and yelled, "Doctor Livingston I
presume!"-dashed back up the stairs.

     Mr. Farnham said, "Oh, God!" and pressed his fists against his
temples. He added in his usual voice, "Get inside, girls. Karen, bolt
the door but listen for me. I'll wait as long as I can." He glanced at
his watch. "Five minutes."

     The girls went in. Barbara whispered, "What happened to Joseph?
Flipped?"

     "Well, sort of. Dr.-Livingston-I-Presume is our cat. Loves Joseph,
tolerates us." Karen started bolting the inner door, heavy steel, and
secured with ten inch-thick bolts.

     She stopped. "I'm damned if I'll bolt this all the way while Daddy
is outside!"

     "Don't bolt it at all."

     Karen shook her head. "I'll use a couple, so he can hear me draw
them. That cat may be a mile away."

     Barbara looked around. It was an L-shaped room; they had entered
the end of one arm. Two bunks were on the right-hand wall; Grace Farnham
was in the lower and still asleep. The left wall was solid with packed
shelves; the passage was hardly wider than the door. The ceiling was low
and arched and of corrugated steel. She could see the ends of two more
bunks at the bend. Duke was not in sight but he quickly appeared from
around the bend, started setting up a card table in the space there. She
watched in amazement as he got out the cards he had picked up-how long
ago? It seemed an hour. Probably less than five minutes.

     Duke saw her, grinned, and placed folding chairs around the table.

     There came a clanging at the door. Karen unbolted it; Joseph
tumbled in, followed by Mr. Farnham. A lordly red Persian cat jumped out
of Joseph's arms, started an inspection. Karen and her father bolted the
door. He glanced at his wife, then said, "Joseph! Help me crank."

     "Yes, sir!"

     Duke came over. "Got her buttoned up, Skipper?"

     "All but the sliding door. It has to be cranked."

     "Then come take your licking." Duke waved at the table. His father
stared. "Duke, are you seriously proposing to finish a card game while
we're being attacked?"

     "I'm four hundred dollars serious. And another hundred says we
aren't being attacked. In a half hour they'll call it off and tomorrow's
papers will say the northern lights fouled up the radar. Play the hand?
Or default?"

     "Mmm- My partner will play it; I'm busy."

     "You stand behind the way she plays it?"

     "Of course."

     Barbara found herself sitting down at the table with a feeling that
she had wandered into a dream. She picked up her partner's hand, studied
it. "Lead, Karen."

     Karen said, "Oh, hell!" and led the trey of clubs. Duke picked up
the dummy, laid it out in suits. "What do you want on it?" he asked.

     "Doesn't matter. I'll play both hands face up."

     "Better not."

     "It's solid." She exposed the cards.

     Duke studied them. "I see," he admitted. "Leave the hands; Dad will
want to see this." He did some figuring. "Call it twenty-four hundred
points. Dad!"

     "Yes, Son?"

     "I'm writing a check for four hundred and ninety-two dollars-and
let that be a lesson to me."

     "You don't need to-"

     All lights went out, the floor slammed against their feet. Barbara
felt frightening pressure on her chest, tried to stand up and was
knocked over. All around was a noise of giant subway trains, and the
floor heaved like a ship in a cross sea.

     "Dad!"

     "Yes, Duke! Are you hurt?"

     "I don't know. But make that five hundred and ninety-two dollars!"

     The subterranean rumbling went on. Through this roar Barbara heard
Mr. Farnham chuckle. "Forget it!" he called out. "The dollar just
depreciated."

     Mrs. Farnham started to scream. "Hubert! Hubert, where are you?
Hubert! Make it stop!"

     "Coming, dear!" A pencil of light cut the blackness, moved toward
the bunks near the door. Barbara raised her head, made out that it was
her host, on hands and knees with a flashlight in his teeth. He reached
the bunk, succeeded in quieting Grace; her screams ceased. "Karen?"

     "Yes, Daddy."

     "Are you all right?"

     "Yes, Just bruised. My chair went over."

     "All right. Get the emergency lighting on in this bay. Don't stand
up. Crawl. I'll light you from here. Then get the hypo kit and-ow! Joseph!"

     "Yes, sir."

     "You in one piece?"

     "I'm okay, Boss."

     "Persuade your furry-faced Falstaff to join you. He jumped on me."

     "He's just friendly, Mr. Farnham."

     "Yes, yes. But I don't want him doing that while I'm giving a hypo.
Call him."

     "Sure thing. Here, Doc! Doe, Doe, Doe! Fish, Doe!"

     Some minutes later the rumbling had died out, the floor was steady,
Mrs. Farnham had been knocked out by injected drug, two tiny lights were
glowing in the first bay, and Mr. Farnham was inspecting.

     Damage was slight. Despite guardrails, cans had popped off shelves;
a fifth of rum was broken. But liquor was almost the only thing stored
in glass, and liquor had been left in cases, the rest of it had come
through. The worst casualty was the shelter's battery-driven radio, torn
loose from the wall and smashed.

     Mr. Farnham was on his knees, retrieving bits of it. His son looked
down. "Don't bother, Dad. Sweep it up and throw it away."

     "Some parts can be salvaged."

     "What do you know about radios?"

     "Nothing," his father admitted. "But I have books."

     "A book won't fix that. You should have stocked a spare."

     "I have a spare."

     "Then for God's sake get it! I want to know what's happened."

     His father got up slowly and looked at Duke. "I would like to know,
too. I can't hear anything over this radio I'm wearing. Not surprising,
it's short range. But the spare is packed in foam and probably wasn't hurt."

     "Then get it hooked up."

     "Later."

     "Later, hell. Where is it?"

     Mr. Farnham breathed hard. "I've had all the yap I'm going to take."

     "Huh? Sorry. Just tell me where the spare is."

     "I shan't. We might lose it, too. I'm going to wait until I'm sure
the attack is over."

     His son shrugged. "Okay, if you want to be difficult. But all of us
want to hear the news. It's a shabby trick if you ask me."

     "Nobody asked you. I told you I've had all the yap I'm going to
take. If you're itching to know what's happening outside, you can leave.
I'll unbolt this door, crank back the armor door, and you can open the
upper door yourself."

     "Eh? Don't be silly."

     "But close it after you. I don't want it open-both for blast and
radioactivity."

     "That's another thing. Don't you have any way to measure
radioactivity? We ought to take steps to-"

     "SHUT UP!"

     "What? Dad, don't pull the heavy-handed father on me."

     "Duke, I ask you to keep quiet and listen. Will you?"

     "Well . . . all right. But I don't appreciate being bawled out in
the presence of others."

     "Then keep your voice down." They were in the first bay near the
door. Mrs. Farnham was snoring by them; the others had retreated around
the bend, unwilling to witness. "Are you ready to listen?"

     "Very well, sir," Duke said stiffly.

     "Good. Son, I was not joking. Either leave . . . or do exactly as I
tell you. That includes keeping your mouth shut when I tell you to.
Which will it be? Absolute obedience, prompt and cheerful? Or will you
leave?"

     "Aren't you being rather high-handed?"

     "I intend to be. This shelter is a lifeboat and I am boat officer.
For the safety of all I shall maintain discipline. Even if it means
tossing somebody overboard."

     "That's a farfetched simile. Dad, it's a shame you were in the
Navy. It gives you romantic ideas."

     "I think it's a shame, Duke, that you never had service. You're not
realistic. Well, which is it? Will you take orders? Or leave?"

     "You know I'm not going to leave. And you're not serious in talking
about it. It's death out there."

     "Then you'll take orders?"

     "Uh, I'll be cooperative. But this absolute dictatorship- Dad,
tonight you made quite a point of the fact that you are a free man.
Well, so am I. I'll cooperate. But I won't take unreasonable orders, and
as for keeping my mouth shut, I'll try to be diplomatic. But when I
think it's necessary, I'll voice my opinion. Free speech. Fair enough?"

     His father sighed. "Not nearly good enough, Duke. Stand aside, I
want to unbolt the door."

     "Don't push a joke too far, Dad."

     "I'm not joking. I'm putting you out."

     "Dad . . . I hate to say this . . . but I don't think you are man
enough. I'm bigger than you are and a lot younger."

     "I know. I've no intention of fighting you."

     "Then let's drop this silly talk."

     "Duke, please! I built this shelter. Not two hours ago you were
sneering at it, telling me that it was a 'sick' thing to do. Now you
want to use it, since it turned out you were wrong. Can't you admit that?"

     "Oh, certainly. You've made your point."

     "Yet you are telling me how to run it. Telling me that I should
have provided a spare radio. When you hadn't provided anything. Can't
you be a man, give in, and do as I tell you? When your life depends on
my hospitality?"

     "Cripes! I told you I would cooperate."

     "But you haven't been doing so. You've been making silly remarks,
getting in my way, giving me lip, wasting my time when I have urgent
things to do. Duke, I don't want your cooperation, on your terms,
according to your judgment. While we are in this shelter I want your
absolute obedience."

     Duke shook his head. "Get it through your head that I'm no longer a
child, Dad. My cooperation, yes. But I won't promise the other."

     Mr. Farnham shook his head sorrowfully. "Maybe it would be better
if you took charge and I obeyed you. But I've given these circumstances
thought and you haven't. Son, I anticipated that your mother might be
hysterical; I had everything ready to handle it. Don't you think I
anticipated this situation?"

     "How so? It's pure chance that I'm here at all."

     "'This situation' I said. It could be anybody. Duke, if we had been
entertaining friends tonight-or if strangers had popped up, say that old
fellow who rang the doorbell-I would have taken them in; I planned on
extras. Don't you think, with all the planning I have done, that I would
realize that somebody might get out of hand? And plan how to force them
into line?"

     "How?"

     "In a lifeboat, how do you tell the boat officer?"

     "Is that a riddle?"

     "No. The boat officer is the one with the gun."

     "Oh. I suppose you do have guns down here. But you don't have one
now, and"- Duke grinned -"Dad, I can't see you shooting me. Can you?"

     His father stared, then dropped his eyes. "No. A stranger, maybe.
But you're my son." He sighed. "Well, I hope you cooperate."

     "I will. I promise you that much."

     "Thank you. If you'll excuse me, I have work to do." Mr. Farnham
turned away. "Joseph!"

     "Yes, sir?"

     "It's condition seven."

     "Condition seven, sir?"

     "Yes, and getting worse. Be careful with the instruments and don't
waste time."

     "Right away, sir!"

     "Thank you." He turned to his son. "Duke, if you really want to
cooperate, you could pick up the pieces of this radio. It's the same
model as the one in reserve. There may be pieces we can use to repair
the other one if it becomes necessary. Will you do that?"

     "Sure, sure. I told you I would cooperate." Duke got on his knees,
started to complete the task he had interrupted.

     "Thank you." His father turned away, moved toward the junction of
the bays.

     "Mr. Duke! Get your hands up!"

     Duke looked over his shoulder, saw Joseph by the card table, aiming
a Thompson submachine gun at him. He jumped to his feet. "What the hell!"

     "Stay there!" Joseph said. "I'll shoot."

     "Yes," agreed Duke's father, "he doesn't have the compunctions you
thought I had. Joseph, if he moves, shoot him."

     "Daddy! What's going on?"

     Mr. Farnham turned to face his daughter. "Get back!"

     "But, Daddy-"

     "Shut up. Both of you get into that lower bunk. Karen on the
inside. Move!"

     Karen moved. Barbara looked wide-eyed at the automatic her host now
held in his hand and got quickly into the lower bunk of the other bay.
"Arms around each other," he said briskly.      "Don't either of you let
the other one move." He went back to the first bay.

     "Duke."

     "Yes?"

     "Lower your hands slowly and unfasten your trousers. Let them fall
but don't step out of them. Then turn slowly and face the door. Unfasten
the bolts."

     "Dad-"

     "Shut up. Joseph, if he does anything but exactly what I told him
to, shoot. Try for his legs, but hit him."

     Face white, expression dazed, Duke did as he was told: let his
trousers fall until he was hobbled, turned and started unbolting the
door. His father let him continue until half the bolts were drawn.
"Duke. Stop. The next few seconds determine whether you go-or stay. You
know the terms."

     Duke barely hesitated. "I accept."

     "I must elaborate. You will not only obey me, you will obey Joseph."

     "Joseph?"

     "My second-in-command. I have to have one, Duke; I can't stay awake
all the time. I would gladly have had you as deputy-but you would have
nothing to do with it. So I trained Joseph. He knows where everything
is, how it works, how to repair it. So he's my deputy. Well? Will you
obey him just as cheerfully? No back talk?"

     Duke said slowly, "I promise."

     "Good. But a promise made under duress isn't binding. There is
another commitment always given under duress and nevertheless binding, a
point which as a lawyer you will appreciate. I want your parole as a
prisoner. Will you give me your parole to abide by the conditions until
we leave the shelter? A straight quid-pro-quo: your parole in exchange
for not being forced outside?"

     "You have my parole."

     "Thank you. Throw the bolts and fasten your trousers. Joseph, stow
the Tommy gun."

     "Okay, Boss."

     Duke secured the door, secured his pants. As he turned around, his
father offered him the automatic, butt first. "What's this for?" Duke asked.

     "Suit yourself. If your parole isn't good, I would rather find it
out now."

     Duke took the gun, removed the clip, worked the slide and caught
the cartridge from the chamber, put it back into the clip and reloaded
the gun-handed it back. "My parole is good. Here."

     "Keep it. You were always a headstrong boy, Duke, but you were
never a liar."

     "Okay. . . Boss." His son put the pistol in a pocket. "Hot in here."

     "And going to get hotter."

     "Eh? How much radiation do you think we're getting?"

     "I don't mean radiation. Fire storm." He walked into the space
where the bays joined, looked at a thermometer, then at his wrist.
"Eighty-four and only twenty-three minutes since we were hit. It'll get
worse."

     "How much worse?"

     "How would I know, Duke? I don't know how far away the hit was, how
many megatons, how widespread the fire. I don't even know whether the
house is burning overhead, or was blasted away. Normal temperature in
here is about fifty degrees. That doesn't look good. But there is
nothing to do about it. Yes, there's one thing. Strip down to shorts. I
shall."

     He went into the other bay. The girls were still in the lower bunk,
arms around each other, keeping quiet. Joseph was on the floor with his
back to the wall, the cat in his lap. Karen looked round-eyed as her
father approached but she said nothing.

     "You kids can get up."

     "Thanks," said Karen. "Pretty warm for snuggling." Barbara backed
out and Karen sat up.

     "So it is. Did you hear what just happened?"

     "Some sort of argument," Karen said cautiously.

     "Yes. And it's the last one. I'm boss and Joseph is my deputy.
Understood?"

     "Yes, Daddy."

     "Mrs. Wells?"

     "Me? Why, of course! It's your shelter. I'm grateful to be in
it-I'm grateful to be alive! And please call me Barbara, Mr. Farnham."

     "Sorry. 11mm- Call me 'Hugh,' I prefer it to "Hubert.' Duke,
everybody-first names from now on. Don't call me 'Dad,' call me 'Hugh.'
Joe, knock off the 'mister' and the 'miss.' Catch?"

     "Okay, Boss, if you say so."

     "Make that 'Okay, Hugh.' Now you girls peel down, panties and bra
or such, then get Grace peeled to her skin and turn the light out there.
It's hot, it's going to get hotter. Joe, strip to your shorts." Mr.
Farnham took his jacket off, started unbuttoning his shirt.

     Joseph said, "Uh, I'm comfortable."

     "I wasn't asking, I was telling you."

     "Uh. . . Boss, I'm not wearing shorts!"

     "He's not," Karen confirmed. "I rushed him."

     "So?" Hugh looked at his ex-houseboy and chuckled. "Joe, you're a
sissy. I should have made Karen straw boss."

     "Suits me."

     "Get a pair out of stores and you can change in the toilet space.
While you're about it, show Duke where it is. Karen, the same for
Barbara. Then we'll gather for a powwow."

     The powwow started five minutes later. Hugh Farnham was at the
table, dealing out bridge hands, assessing them. When they were seated
he said, "Anybody for bridge?"

     "Daddy, you're joking."

     "My name is 'Hugh.' I was not joking, a rubber of bridge might
quiet your nerves. Put away that cigarette, Duke."

     "Uh . . . sorry."

     "You can smoke tomorrow, I think. Tonight I've got pure oxygen
cracked pretty wide and we are taking in no air. You saw the bottles in
the toilet space?" The space between the bays was filled by pressure
bottles, a water tank, a camp toilet, stores, and a small area where a
person might manage a stand-up bath. Air intakes and exhausts, capped
off, were there, plus a hand-or-power blower, and scavengers for carbon
dioxide and water vapor. This space was reached by an archway between
the tiers of bunks.

     "Oxygen in those? I thought it was air."

     "Couldn't afford the space penalty. So we can't risk fire, even a
cigarette. I opened one inlet for a check. Very hot- heat 'hot' as well
as making a Geiger counter chatter. Folks, I don't know how long we'll
be on bottled breathing. I figured thirty-six hours for four people, so
it's nominally twenty-four hours for six, but that's not the pinch. I'm
sweating-and so are you. We can take it to about a hundred and twenty.
Above that, we'll have to use oxygen just to cool the place. It might
end in a fine balance between heat and suffocation. Or worse."

     "Daddy-'Hugh,' I mean. Are you breaking it gently that we are going
to be baked alive?"

     "You won't be, Karen. I won't let you be."

     "Well . . . I prefer a bullet."

     "Nor will you be shot. I have enough sleeping pills to let twenty
people die painlessly. But we aren't here to die. We've had vast luck;
with a little more we'll make it. So don't be morbid."

     "How about radioactivity?" asked Duke.

     "Can you read an integrating counter?"

     "No."

     "Take my word for it that we are in no danger yet. Now about
sleeping- This side, where Grace is, is the girls' dorm; this other side
is ours. Only four bunks but that's okay; one person has to monitor air
and heat, and the other one without a bed can keep him awake. However,
I'm taking the watch tonight and won't need company; I've taken Dexedrine."

     "I'll stand watch."

     "I'll stay up with you."

     "I'm not sleepy."

     "Slow down!" Hugh said. "Joe, you can't stand watch now because you
have to relieve me when I'm tuckered out. You and I will alternate until
the situation is safe."

     Joe shrugged and kept quiet. Duke said, "Then it's my privilege."

     "Can't either of you add? Two bunks for women, two for men. What's
left over? We'll fold this table and the gal left over can sprawl on the
floor here. Joe, break out the blankets and put a couple here and a
couple in the tank space for me."

     "Right away, Hugh!"

     Both girls insisted on standing watch. Hugh shut them off. "Cut for
it."

     "But-"

     "Pipe down, Barbara. Ace low, and low girl sleeps in a bunk, the
other here on the floor. Duke, do you want a sleeping pill?"

     "That's one habit I don't have."

     "Don't be an iron man."

     "Well. . . a rain check?"

     "Surely. Joe? Seconal?"

     "Well, I'm so relieved that I don't have to take that quiz
tomorrow. . ."

     "Glad somebody is happy. All right."

     "I was going to add that I'm pretty keyed up. You're sure you won't
need me?"

     "I'm sure. Karen, get one for Joe. You know where?"

     "Yes, and I'm going to get one for me, since I won the cut. I'm no
iron man! And a Miltown on top of it."

     "Do that. Sorry, Barbara, you can't have one; I might have to wake
you and have you keep me awake. You can have Miltown. You'll probably
sleep from it."

     "I don't need it."

     "As you wish. Bed, everybody. It's midnight and two of you are
going on watch in eight hours."

     In a few minutes all were in bed, with Barbara where the table had
been; all lights out save one in the tank space. Hugh squatted on
blankets there, playing solitaire-badly.

     Again the floor heaved, again came that terrifying rumble. Karen
screamed.

     Hugh was up at once. This one was not as violent; he was able to
stay on his feet. He hurried into the girls' dorm. "Baby! Where are
you?" He fumbled, found the light switch.

     "Up here, Daddy. Oh, I'm scared! I was just dropping off and it
almost threw me out. Help me down."

     He did so; she clung to him, sobbing. "There, there," he said,
patting her. "You've been a brave girl, don't let it throw you."

     "I'm not brave. I've been scared silly all along. I just didn't
want it to show."

     "Well . . . I'm scared too. So let's not show it, huh? Better have
another pill. And a stiff drink."

     "All right. Both. I'm not going to sleep in that bunk. It's too hot
up there, as well as scary when it shakes."

     "All right, I'll pull the mattress down. Where's your panties and
bra, baby girl? Better put 'em on."

     "Up there. I don't care, I just want people. Oh, I suppose I
should. Shock Joseph if I didn't."

     "Just a moment. Here are your pants. But where did you hide your
brassiere?"

     "Maybe it got pushed down behind."

     Hugh dragged the mattress down. "I don't find it."

     "The hell with it. Joe can look the other way. I want that drink."

     "All right. Joe's a gentleman."

     Duke and Barbara were sitting on the blanket she had been napping
on; they were looking very solemn. Hugh said, "Where's Joe? He wasn't
hurt, was he?"

     Duke gave a short laugh. "Want to see 'Sleeping Innocence'? That
bottom bunk."

     Hugh found his second-in-command sprawled on his back, snoring, as
deeply unconscious as Grace Farnham. Dr.-Livingstone-I-Presume was
curled up on his chest. Hugh came back. "Well, that blast was farther
away. I'm glad Joe could sleep."

     "It was too damned close to suit me! When are they going to run out
of those things?"

     "Soon, I hope. Folks, Karen and I have just formed the
'I'm-scared-too' club and are about to celebrate with a drink. Any
candidates?"

     "I'm a charter member!"

     "So am I," agreed Barbara. "God, yes!"

     Hugh fetched paper cups, and bottles-Scotch, Seconal, and Miltown.
"Water, anyone?"

     Duke said, "I don't want anything interfering with the liquor."

     "Water, please," Barbara answered. "It's so hot."

     "How hot is it, Daddy?"

     "Duke, I put the thermometer in the tank room. Go see, will you?"

     "Sure. And may I use that rain check?"

     "Certainly." Hugh gave Karen another Seconal capsule, another
Miltown pill, and told Barbara that she must take a Miltown-then took
one himself, having decided that Dexedrine had made him edgy. Duke returned.

     "One hundred and four degrees," he announced. "I opened the valve
another quarter turn. All right?"

     "Have to open it still wider soon. Here are your pills, Duke-a
double dose of Seconal and a Miltown."

     "Thanks." Duke swallowed them, chased them with whisky. "I'm going
to sleep on the floor, too. Coolest place in the house."

     "Smart of you. All right, let's settle down. Give the pills a chance."

     Hugh sat with Karen after she bedded down, then gently extracted
his hand from hers and returned to the tank room. The temperature was up
two degrees. He opened the valve on the working tank still wider,
listened to it sigh to emptiness, shook his head, got a wrench and
shifted the gauge to a full tank. Before he opened it, he attached a
hose, led it out into the main room. Then he went back to pretending to
play solitaire.

     A few minutes later Barbara appeared in the doorway. "I'm not
sleepy," she said. "Could you use some company?"

     "You've been crying."

     "Does it show? I'm sorry."

     "Come sit down. Want to play cards?"

     "If you want to. All I want is company."

     "We'll talk. Would you like another drink?"

     "Oh, would I! Can you spare it?"

     "I stocked plenty. Barbara, can you think of a better night to have
a drink? But both of us will have to see to it that the other one
doesn't go to sleep."

     "All right. I'll keep you awake."

     They shared a cup, Scotch with water from the tank. It poured out
as sweat faster than they drank it. Hugh increased the gas flow again
and found that the ceiling was unpleasantly hot. "Barbara, the house
must have burned over us. There is thirty inches of concrete above us
and then two feet of dirt."

     "How hot do you suppose it is outside?"

     "Couldn't guess. We must have been close to the fireball." He felt
the ceiling again. "I beefed this thing up-roof, walls, and floor are
all one steel-reinforced box. It was none too much. We may have trouble
getting the doors open. All this heat- And probably warped by concussion."

     She said quietly, "Are we trapped?"

     "No, no. Under these bottles is a hatch to a tunnel. Thirty inch
culvert pipe with concrete around it. Leads to the gully back of the
garden. We can break out-crowbars and a hydraulic jack-even if the end
is crushed in and covered with crater glass. I'm not worried about that;
I'm worried about how long we can stay inside . . . and whether it will
be safe when we leave."

     "How bad is the radioactivity?"

     He hesitated. "Barbara, would it mean anything to you? Know
anything about radiation?"

     "Enough. I'm majoring-I was majoring-in botany; I've used isotopes
in genetics experiments. I can stand bad news, Hugh, but not
knowing-well, that's why I was crying."

     "Mmm- The situation is worse than I told Duke." He jerked his thumb
over his shoulder. "Integrating counter back of the bottles. Go look."

     She went to it, stayed several minutes. When she came back, she sat
down without speaking. "Well?" he asked.

     "Could I have another drink?"

     "Certainly." He mixed it.

     She sipped it, then said quietly, "If the slope doesn't change,
we'll hit the red line by morning." She frowned. "But that marks a
conservative limit. III remember the figures, we probably won't start
vomiting for at least another day."

     "Yes. And the curve should level off soon. That's why heat worries
me more than radiation." He looked at the thermometer, cracked the valve
still wider. "I've been running the water-vapor getter on battery; I
don't think we should crank the blower in this heat. I'm not going to
worry about Cee-Oh-Two until we start to pant."

     "Seems reasonable."

     "Let's forget the hazards. Anything you'd like to talk about?
Yourself?"

     "Little to tell, Hugh. Female, white, twenty-five years old. Back
in school, or was, after a bad marriage. A brother in the Air Force-so
possibly he's all right. My parents were in Acapulco, so perhaps they
are, too. No pets, thank God-and I was so pleased that Joe saved his
cat. No regrets, Hugh, and not afraid. . . not really. Just . . . sad."
She sniffed. "It was a pretty nice world, even if I did crumb up my
marriage."

     "Don't cry."

     "I'm not crying! Those drops are sweat."

     "Yes. Surely."

     "They are. It's terribly hot." Suddenly she reached both hands
behind her ribs. "Do you mind? If I take this off? Like Karen? It's
smothering me."

     "Go ahead. Child, if you can get comfortable-or less
uncomfortable-do so. I've seen Karen all her life, Grace even longer.
Skin doesn't shock me." He stood up, went behind the oxygen bottles, and
looked at the record of radiation. Having done so, he checked the
thermometer and increased the flow of oxygen.

     As he sat down he remarked, "I might as well have stored air
instead of oxygen, then we could smoke. But I did not expect to use it
for cooling." He ignored the fact that she had accepted his invitation
to be comfortable. He added, "I was worried about heating the place. I
tried to design a stove to use contaminated air safely. Possible. But
difficult."

     "I think you did amazingly well. This is the only shelter I've ever
heard of with stored air. You're a scientist. Aren't you?"

     "Me? Heavens, no. High school only. What little I know I picked up
here and there. Some in the Navy, metal work and correspondence courses.
Then I worked for a public futility and learned something about
construction and pipelines. Then I became a contractor." He smiled. "No,
Barbara, I'm a 'general specialist.' 'The Elephant Child's 'satiable
curiosity.' Like Dr. -Livingston-I-Presume.

     "How did a cat get a name like that?"

     "Karen. Because he's a great explorer. That cat can get into
anything. Do you like cats?"

     "I don't know much about them. But Dr. Livingstone is a beauty."

     "So he is but I like all cats. You don't own a cat, he is a free
citizen. Take dogs; dogs are friendly and fun and loyal. But slaves. Not
their fault, they've been bred for it. But slavery makes me queasy, even
in animals."

     He frowned. "Barbara, I'm not as sad over what has happened as you
are. It might be good for us. I don't mean us six; I mean our country."

     She looked startled. "How?"

     "Well- It's hard to take the long view when you are crouching in a
shelter and wondering how long you can hold out. But- Barbara, I've
worried for years about our country. It seems to me that we have been
breeding slaves-and I believe in freedom. This war may have turned the
tide. This may be the first war in history which kills the stupid rather
than the bright and able-where it makes any distinction."

     "How do you figure that, Hugh?"

     "Well, wars have always been hardest on the best young men. This
time the boys in service are as safe or safer than civilians. And of
civilians those who used their heads and made preparations stand a far
better chance. Not every case, but on the average, and that will improve
the breed. When it's over, things will be tough, and that will improve
the breed still more. For years the surest way of surviving has been to
be utterly worthless and breed a lot of worthless kids. All that will
change."

     She nodded thoughtfully. "That's standard genetics. But it seems
cruel."

     "It is cruel. But no government yet has been able to repeal natural
laws, though they keep trying."

     She shivered in spite of the heat. "I suppose you're right. No, I
know you're right. But I could face it more cheerfully if I thought
there was going to be any country left. Killing the poorest third is
good genetics . . . but there is nothing good about killing them all."

     "Mmm, yes. I hate to think about it. But I did think about it.
Barbara, I didn't stockpile oxygen just against radiation and fire
storm. I had in mind worse things."

     "Worse? How?"

     "All the taik about the horrors of World War Three has been about
atomic weapons-fallout, hundred-megaton bombs, neutron bombs. The
disarmament talks and the pacifist parades have all been about the Bomb,
the Bomb, the Bomb-as if A-weapons were the only thing that could kill.
This may not be just an A-weapons war; more likely it is an ABC
war-atomic, biological, and chemical." He hooked a thumb at the tanks.
"That's why I stocked that bottled breathing. Against nerve gas.
Aerosols. Viruses. God knows what. The communists won't smash this
country if they can kill us without destroying our wealth. I wouldn't be
surprised to learn that bombs had been used only on military targets
like the antimissile base here, but that New York and Detroit and such
received nerve gas. Or a twenty-four plague with eighty percent
mortality. The horrid possibilities are endless. The air outside could
be loaded with death that a counter won't detect and a filter can't
stop." He smiled grimly. "Sorry. You had better go back to bed."

     "I'm miserable anyway and don't want to be alone. May I stay?"

     "Certainly. I'm happier with you present no matter how gloomy I sound."

     "What you've been saying isn't nearly as gloomy as the thoughts I
have alone. I wish we knew what was going on outside!" She added, "I
wish we had a periscope."

     "We do have."

     "Huh? Where?"

     "Did have. Sorry. That pipe over there. I tried to raise it but it
won't budge. However- Barbie, I tromped on Duke for demanding that I
break out our spare radio before the attack was over. But maybe it's
over. What do you think?"

     "Me? How would I know?"

     "You know as much as I do. That first missile was intended to take
out the MAMMA base; they wouldn't bother with us otherwise. If they are
spotting from orbiting spaceships, then that second one was another try
at the same target. The timing fits, time of flight from Kamchatka is
about half an hour and the second hit about forty-five minutes after the
first. That one was probably a bull's-eye-and they know it, because more
than an hour has passed and no third missile. That means they are
through with us. Logical?"

     "Sounds logical to me."

     "It's crumby logic, my dear. Not enough data. Perhaps both missiles
failed to knock out MAMMA, and MAMMA is now knocking out anything they
throw. Perhaps the Russkis have run out of missiles. Perhaps the third
round will be delivered by bomber. We don't know. But I'm itching to
find out. Twist my arm."

     "I would certainly like to hear some news."

     "We'll try. If it's good news, we'll wake the others." Hugh Farnham
dug into a corner, came out with a box, unpacked a radio. "Doesn't have
a scratch. Let's try it without an antenna.

     "Nothing but static," he announced shortly. "Not surprised.
Although it's mate could pull in local stations without an aerial. Now
we'll hook to the fixed antenna. Wait here."

     He returned shortly. "No soap. Stands to reason that there isn't
anything left of the fixed antenna. So we'll try the emergency one."

     Hugh took a wrench and removed a cap from an inch pipe that stuck
down through the ceiling. He tested the opening with a radiation
counter. "A little more count." He got two steel rods, each five feet
long; with one he probed the pipe. "Doesn't go up as far as it should.
The top of this pipe was buried just belowground. Trouble." He screwed
the second rod into the first.

     "Now comes the touchy part. Stand back, there may be debris-hot
both ways-spilling down."

     "It'll get on you."

     "On my hands, maybe. I'll scrub afterwards. You can go over me with
a Geiger counter." He tapped with a sledge on the bottom of the joined
rods. Up they went about eighteen inches. "Something solid. I'll have to
bang it."

     Many blows later the rod was seated into the pipe. "It felt," he
said, as he stopped to scrub his hands, "as if we passed into open air
the last foot or so. But it should have stuck out five feet above
ground. Rubble, I suppose. What's left of our home. Want to use the
counter on me?"

     "Hugh, you say that as casually as 'What's left of yesterday's milk."

     He shrugged. "Barbie girl, I was broke when I joined the Navy, I've
been flat busted since; I will not waste tears over a roof and some
plumbing. Getting any count?"

     "You're clean."

     "Check the floor under the pipe."

     There were hot spots on the floor; Hugh wiped them with damp
Kleenex, disposed of it in a metal waste can. She checked his hands
afterwards, and the spots on the floor.

     "Well, that used up a gallon of water; this radio had better work."
He clipped the antenna lead to the rod, switched it on.

     Ten minutes later they admitted that they were getting nothing.
Noise-static all over the dial-but no signal. He sighed. "I'm not
surprised. I don't know what ionization does to radio waves, but that
must be a sorcerer's brew of hot isotopes over our heads. I had hoped we
could get Salt Lake City."

     "Not Denver?"

     "No. Denver had an ICBM base. I'll leave the gain up; maybe we'll
hear something."

     "Don't you want to save the battery?"

     "Not really. Let's sit down and recite limericks." He looked at the
integrating counter, whistled softly, then checked the thermometer.
"I'll give our sleeping beauties a little more relief from the heat. How
well are you standing it, Barbie?"

     "Truthfully, I had forgotten it. The sweat pours off and that's that."

     "Me, too."

     "Well, don't use more oxygen on my account. How many bottles are left?"

     "Not many."

     "How many?"

     "Less than half. Don't fret. I'll bet you five hundred thousand
dollars-fifty cents in the new currency-that you can't recite a limerick
I don't know."

     "Clean, or dirty?"

     "Are there clean ones?"

     "Okay. 'A playful young fellow named Scott-'" The limerick session
was a flop. Hugh accused her of having a clean mind. She answered, "Not
really, Hugh. But my mind isn't working."

     "I'm not at my sharpest. Another drink?"

     "Yes. With water, please, I sweat so; I'm dry. Hugh?"

     "Yes, Barbie?"

     "We're going to die. Aren't we?"

     "Yes."

     "I thought so. Before morning?"

     "Oh, no! I feel sure we can live till noon. If we want to."

     "I see. Hugh, would you mind if I moved over by you? Would you put
your arm around me? Or is it too hot?"

     "Any time I'm too hot to put my arm around a girl I'll know I'm
dead and in hell."

     "Thanks."

     "Room enough?"

     "Plenty."

     "You're a little girl."

     "I weigh a hundred and thirty-two pounds and I'm five feet eight
and that's not little."

     "You're a little girl. Put the cup aside. Tilt your face up."

     "Mmmm- Again. Please, again."

     "A greedy little girl."

     "Yes. Very greedy. Thank you, Hugh."

     "Such pretty ones."

     "They're my best feature. My face isn't much. But Karen's are
prettier."

     "A matter of opinion. Your opinion."

     "Well- I won't argue. Scrunch over a little, dear. Dear Hugh-"

     "All right?"

     "Room enough. Wonderfully all right. And kiss me, too. Please?"

     "Barbara, Barbara!"

     "Hugh darling! I love you. Oh!"

     "I love you, Barbara."

     "Yes. Yes! Oh, please! Now!"

     "Right now!"

 

     "You all right, Barbie?"

     "I've never been more all right. I've never been happier in my life."

     "I wish that were true."

     "It is true. Hugh darling, I'm utterly happy now and not at all
afraid. I feel wonderful. Not even too warm."

     "I'm dripping sweat on you."

     "I don't mind. There are two drops on your chin and one on the end
of your nose. And I'm so sweaty my hair is soaked. Doesn't matter. Hugh
dearest, this is what I wanted. You. I don't mind dying-now."

     "I do!"

     "I'm sorry."

     "No, no! Barbie hon, I didn't mind dying, before. Now suddenly life
is worth living."

     "Oh. I think it's the same feeling."

     "Probably. But we aren't going to die, ii I can swing it. Want to
move now?"

     "If you want to. If you'll put your arm around me after we do."

     "Try to stop me. But first I'm going to make us a long, tall drink.
I'm thirsty again. And breathless."

     "Me, too. Your heart is pounding."

     "It has every excuse. Barbie girl, do you realize that I am more
than twice your age? Old enough to be your father."

     "Yes, Daddy."

     "Why, you little squirt! Talk that way and I'll drink this all myself."

     "Yes, Hugh. Hugh my beloved. But we are the same age

     because we are going to die at the same time."

     "Don't talk about dying. I'm going to find some way to outwit it."

     "If anybody can, you will. Hugh, I'm not feeling morbid. I've
looked it in the face and I'm no longer afraid-not afraid to die, not
afraid to live. But- Hugh, I'd like one favor."

     "Name it."

     "When you give the pills to the others-the overdose-I don't want them."

     "Uh. . . it might be needful."

     "I didn't mean that I wouldn't; I will when you tell me to. But not
when the others do. Not until you do."

     "Mmm, Barbie, I don't plan on taking them."

     "Then please don't make me take them."

     "Well- I'll think about it. Now shut up. Kiss me."

     "Yes, dear."

     "Such long legs you have, Barbie. Strong, too."

     "And such big feet."

     "Quit fishing for compliments. I like your feet. You would look
unfinished without them."

     "Be inconvenient, too. Hugh, do you know what I would like to do?"

     "Again?"

     "No, no. Well, yes. But right now."

     "Sleep? Go ahead, dear. I won't fall asleep."

     "No, not sleep. I'm not ever going to sleep again. Never. I can't
spare one minute we've got left. I was thinking that I would like to
play contract again-as your partner."

     "Well- We might be able to rouse Joe. Not the others; three grains
of Seconal is pretty convincing. We could play three-handed."

     "No, no. I don't want any company but you. But I so enjoyed
playing, as your partner."

     "You're a good partner, honey. The best. When you say 'by the
book,' you mean it."

     "Not 'the best.' I'm not in your class. But I wish that we had-oh,
years and years !-so that I could get to be. And I wish the attack had
held off ten minutes, so that you could have played that grand slam."

     "Didn't need to. When you answered my bid I knew it was a
lay-down." He squeezed her shoulders. "Three grand slams in one night."

     "Three?"

     "Didn't you consider that H-bomb a grand slam?"

     "Oh. And then there was the second bomb, later."

     "I was not counting the second bomb, it was too far away. If you
don't know what I counted, I refuse to draw a diagram."

     "Oh! In that case, there could easily be a fourth grand slam. I
can't make another forcing bid; my bra is gone and-"

     "Was that a forcing bid?"

     "Of course it was. But you can make the next forcing bid. I'll spot
it."

     "Slow down! Three grand slams is maximum. A small slam, maybe-if I
take another Dexedrine. But four grand slams? Impossible. You know how
old I am."

     "We'll see. I think we'll get a fourth."

     At that moment the biggest slam of all hit them.

 

 

 

Chapter 3

 

 

 

     The light went out, Grace Farnham screamed,
Dr.-Livingstone--I-Presume wailed, Barbara was knocked silly and came to
heaped over a steel bottle and disoriented by blackness and no floors or
walls.

     She groped around, found a leg, found Hugh attached to it. He was
limp. She felt for his heartbeat, could not find it.

She shouted: "Hello! Hello! Anybody!" Duke answered, "Barbara?"

     "Yes, yes!"

     "Are you all right?"

     "I'm all right. Hugh is hurt. I think he's dead."

     "Take it easy. When I find my trousers, I'll light a match- if I
can get off my shoulders. I'm standing on them."

     "Hubert! Hubert!"

     "Yes, Mother! Wait." Grace continued to scream; Duke alternated
reassurances and cursing the darkness. Barbara felt around, slipped on
loose oxygen bottles, hurt her shin, and found a flat surface. She could
not tell what it was; it was canted steeply.

     Duke called out, "Got 'em!" A match flared up, torch bright in
oxygen-rich air.

     Joe's voice said, "Better put that out. Fire hazard." A flashlight
beam cut the gloom.

     Barbara called out, "Joe! Help me with Hugh!"

     "Got to see about lights."

     "He may be dying."

     "Can't do a thing without light." Barbara shut up, tried again to
find heartbeat-found it and clutched Hugh's head, sobbing.

     Lights came on in the men's bay; enough trickled in so that Barbara
could make out her surroundings. The floor sloped about thirty degrees;
she, Hugh, steel bottles, water tank, and other gear were jumbled in the
lower corner. The tank had sprung a leak and was flooding the toilet
space. She saw that, had the tilt been the other way, she and Hugh would
have been buried under steel and water.

     Minutes later Duke and Joe joined her, letting themselves down
through the door. Joe carried a camp lamp. Duke said to Joe, "How are we
going to move him?"

     "We don't. It might be his spine."

     "Still have to move him."

     "We don't move him," Joe said firmly. "Barbara, have you moved him?"

     "I took his head in my lap."

     "Well, don't move him anymore." Joe looked his patient over,
touching him gently. "I can't see any gross injuries," he decided.
"Barbara, if you can stay put, we'll wait until he comes to. Then I can
check his eyes for concussion, see if he can wiggle his toes, things
like that."

     "I'll hold still. Anybody else hurt?"

     "Not to speak of," Duke assured her. "Joe thinks he's cracked some
ribs and I wrenched a shoulder. Mother just got rolled into the corner
of her bunk. Sis is soothing her. Sis is okay-a lump on her head where a
can conked her. Are you all right?"

     "Just bruises. Hugh and I were playing double solitaire and trying
to keep cool when it hit." She wondered how long the lie would stand up.
Duke had no more on than she did and didn't seem troubled by it; Joe was
dressed in underwear shorts. She added, "The cat? Is he all right?"

     "Dr.-Livingstone-I-Presume," Joe answered seriously, "escaped
injury. But he is vexed that his sandbox was dumped over. He's cleaning
himself and criticizing."

     "I'm glad he wasn't hurt."

     "Notice anything about this blast?"

     "What, Joe? It was the hardest of the three. Much the hardest."

     "Yes. But no rumbling. Just one great, big, grand slam, then. . .
nothing."

     "What does that indicate?"

     "I don't know. Barbara, can you stay here and not move? I want to
get more lights on, check the damage, and see what to do about it."

     "I won't move." Hugh seemed to be breathing easily. In the silence
she could hear his heart beat. She decided that she didn't have anything
to be unhappy about.

     Karen joined her, carrying a flashlight and moving carefully on the
slant. "How's Daddy?"

     "No change."

     "Knocked cold, I guess. So was I. You okay?" She played the
flashlight over Barbara.

     "Not hurt."

     "Well! I'm glad you're in uniform, too. I can't find my pants. Joe
ignores it so carefully, it's painful. Is that boy square!"

     "I don't know where my clothes are."

     "Joe has the only pants among us. What happened to you? Were you
asleep?"

     "No. I was here. We were talking."

     "Hmm- Further deponent sayeth not. I'll keep your grisly secret.
Mother won't know; I gave her another hypo."

     "Aren't you jumping at conclusions?"

     "My favorite exercise. I hope my nasty suspicions are correct. I
wish I had had something better to do than sleep last night. Since it's
probably our last night." She leaned over and kissed Barbara. "I like you."

     "Thanks, Karen. Me, too. You."

     "Let's hold a funeral and preach about what nice guys we are. You
made my daddy happy when you had the guts to bid that slam. If you made
him happier still, I'm in favor of it." She straightened up. "'Bye. I'll
go sort groceries. If Daddy wakes up, yell." She left.

     "Barbara?"

     "Yes, Hugh? Yes!"

     "Keep your voice down. I heard what my daughter said."

     "You did?"

     "Yes. She's a gentleman. Barbara? I love you. I may not have
another chance to say so."

     "I love you."

     "Darling."

     "Shall I call the others?"

     "Shortly. Are you comfortable?"

     "Oh, very!"

     "Then let me rest a bit. I feel woozy."

     "As long as you like. Uh, can you wiggle your toes? Do you hurt
anyplace?"

     "I hurt lots of places, but not too much. Let me see- Yes, I can
move everything. All right, call Joe."

     "No hurry."

     "Better call him. Work to do."

     Shortly Mr. Farnham was back in charge. Joe required him to move
himself-a mass of bruises but no break, sprain, nor concussion. It
seemed to Barbara that Hugh had landed on the bottles and that she had
landed on him. She did not discuss her theory.

     Hugh's first act was to bind Joe's ribs with elastic bandage. Joe
gasped as it tightened but seemed more comfortable with it. The lump on
Karen's head was inspected; Hugh decided that there was nothing he could
do for it.

     "Will somebody fetch the thermometer?" he asked. "Duke?"

     "It's busted."

     "It's a bimetal job. Shockproof."

     "I looked for it," Duke explained, "while you were doctoring. Seems
cooler to me. While it may be shockproof, it couldn't stand being mashed
between two tanks."

     "Oh. Well, it's no big loss."

     "Dad? Wouldn't this be a good time to try the spare radio? Just a
suggestion."

     "I suppose so, but- I hate to tell you, Duke, but you'll probably
find it smashed, too. We tried it earlier. No results." He glanced at
his wrist. "An hour and half ago. At two A.M. Has anyone else the time?"

     Duke's watch agreed.

     "We seem to be in fair shape," Hugh decided, "except for water.
There are some plastic jugs of water but we need to salvage the tank
water; we may have to drink it. With Halazone tablets. Joe, we need
utensils of any sort, and everybody bail. Keep it as clean as you can."
He added, "When Joe can spare you, Karen, scrounge some breakfast. We've
got to eat, even if this is Armageddon."

     "And Armageddon sick of it," Karen offered.

     Her father winced. "Baby girl, you will write on the blackboard one
thousand times: 'I will not make bad puns before breakfast.'"

     "I thought it was pretty good, Hugh."

     "Don't encourage her, Barbara. All right, get with it."

     Karen returned shortly, carrying Dr. Livingstone. "I wasn't much
help," she announced, "because somebody has to hang onto this damn cat.
He wants to help."

     "Kablerrrrt!"

     "You did so! I'm going to entice him with sardines and get
breakfast. What do you want, Daddy Hugh Boss? Crêpes Suzettes?"

     "Yes."

     "What you'll get is Spam and crackers."

     "All right. How's the bailing going?"

     "Daddy, I won't drink that water even with Halazone." She made a
face. "You know where it wound up."

     "We may have to drink it."

     "Well. . . if you cut it with whisky-"

     "Mmm- Every case of liquor is leaking. The two I've opened each has
one fifth, unbroken."

     "Daddy, you've ruined breakfast."

     "The question is, do I ration it evenly? Or save it all for Grace?"

     "Oh." Karen's features screwed up in painful decision. "She can
have my share. But the others shouldn't be deprived just because Gracie
has a yen."

     "Karen, at this stage it's not a yen. In a way, for her it's medicine."

     "Yeah, sure. And diamond bracelets and sable coats are medicine for
me."

     "Baby, there's no point in blaming her. It may be my fault. Duke
thinks so. When you are my age, you will learn to take people as they are."

     "Hush mah mouf. Maybe I'm harsh-but I get tired of bringing friends
home and having Mom pass out about dinnertime. Or try to kiss my boy
friends in the kitchen."

     "She does that?"

     "Haven't you seen? No, you probably haven't. Sorry."

     "I'm sorry, too. But only on your account. It's a peccadillo, at
most. As I was saying, when you get to be my age-"

     "Daddy, I don't expect to get to be your age-and we both know it.
If we've got even two fifths of liquor, it's probably enough. Why don't
you just serve it to whoever needs it?"

     The lines in his face got deeper. "Karen, I haven't given up. It's
distinctly cooler. We may get out of this yet."

     "Well- I guess that's the proper attitude. Speaking of medicine,
didn't you squirrel away some Antabuse when we built this monster?"

     "Karen, Antabuse doesn't stop the craving; it simply makes the
patient deathly ill if he drinks. If your estimate of our chances is
correct, can you see any reason why I should force Grace to spend her
last hours miserably? I'm not her judge, I'm her husband."

     Karen sighed. "Daddy, you have an annoying habit of being right.
All right, she can have mine."

     "I was merely asking your opinion. You've helped. I've decided."

     "Decided how?"

     "None of your business, half pint. Get breakfast."

     "I'm going to put kerosene in yours. Give me a kiss, Daddy."

     He did. "Now pipe down and get to work."

     Five of them gathered for breakfast, sitting on the floor as chairs
would not stand up. Mrs. Farnham was still lethargic from heavy
sedation. The others shared canned meat, crackers, cold Nescafé, canned
peaches, and warm comradeship. They were dressed, the men in shorts,
Karen in shorts and halter, and Barbara in a muumuu belonging to Karen.
Her underwear had been salvaged but was soaked and the air was too moist
to dry it.

     Hugh announced, "Time for a conference. Suggestions are welcome."
He looked at his son.

     "One item, Dad-Hugh," Duke answered. "The backhouse took a beating.
I patched it and rigged a platform out of boards that had secured the
air bottles. Just one thing-" He turned to his sister. "You setter types
be careful. It's shaky."

     "You be careful. You were the one hard to housebreak. Ask Daddy."

     "Stow it, Karen. Good job, Duke. But with six of us I think we
should rig a second one. Can we manage that, Joe?"

     "Yes, we could. But. . ."

     "But what?"

     "Do you know how much oxy is left?"

     "I do. We must shift to blower and filter soon. And there is not a
working radiation counter left. So we won't know what we'll be letting
in. However, we've got to breathe."

     "But did you look at the blower?"

     "It looked all right."

     "It's not. I don't think I can repair it."

     Mr. Farnham sighed. "I've had a spare on order for six months.
Well, I'll look at it, too. And you, Duke; maybe one of us can fix it."

     "Okay."

     "Let's assume we can't repair it. Then we use the oxygen as
sparingly as possible. After that we can get along, for a while, on the
air inside. But there will come a time when we have to open the door."

     Nobody said anything. "Smile, somebody!" Hugh went on. "We aren't
licked. We'll rig dust filters out of sheets in the door-better than
nothing. We still have one radio-the one you mistook for a hearing aid,
Barbara. I wrapped it and put it away; it wasn't hurt. I'll go outside
and put up an antenna and we can listen to it down here; it could save
us. We'll rig a flagpole, from the sides of a bunk perhaps, and fly a
flag. A hunting shirt. No, the American flag; I've got one. If we don't
make it, we'll go down with our colors flying!"

     Karen started clapping. "Don't scoff, Karen."

     "I'm not scoffing, Daddy! I'm crying. 'The rockets' red glare-the
bombs bursting in air-gave proof through the night- that our flag was
still-'" Her voice broke and she buried her face in her hands.

     Barbara put an arm around her. Hugh Farnham went on as if nothing
had happened. "But we won't go down. Soon they will search this area for
survivors. They'll see our flag and take us out-helicopter, probably.

     "So our business is to be alive when they come." He stopped to
think. "No unnecessary work, no exercise. Sleeping pills for everybody
and try to sleep twelve hours a day and lie down all the time; it will
make the air last as long as possible. The only work is to repair that
blower and we'll knock that off if we can't fix it. Let's see- Water
must be rationed. Duke, you are water marshal. See how much pure water
there is; work out a schedule to stretch it. There is a one-ounce glass
with the medicines; use it to dispense water. That's all, I guess:
repair the blower, minimum exercise, maximum sleep, rationed water. Oh,
yes! Sweat is wasteful. It's still hot and, Barbara, you've sweat right
through that sack. Take it off."

     "May I leave the room?"

     "Certainly." She left, walking carefully on the steep floor, went
into the tank room, and returned wearing her soaked underwear. "That's
better," he approved. "Now-"

     "Hubert! Hubert! Where are you? I'm thirsty." "Duke, give her one
ounce. Charge it to her." "Yes, sir."

     "Don't forget that the cat has to have water."

     "The dirty water, maybe?"

     "Hmm. We won't die through playing fair with our guest. Let's keep
our pride."

     "He's been drinking the dirty water."

     "Well- You boss it. Suggestions, anyone? Joe, do the plans suit you?"

     "Well- No, sir."

     "So?"

     "No exercise, least oxygen used, makes sense. But when it comes
time to open the door, where are we?"

     "We take our chances."

     "I mean, can we? Short on air, panting, thirsty, maybe sick- I'd
like to be certain that anyone, Karen say, with a broken arm, can get
that door open."

     "I see."

     "I'd like to try all three doors. I'd like to leave the armor door
open. A girl can't handle that crank. I volunteer to try the upper door."

     "Sorry, it's my privilege. I go along with the rest. That's why I
asked for suggestions. I'm tired, Joe; my mind is fuzzy."

     "And if the doors are blocked? Probably rubble against the upper door-"

     "We have the jack."

     "Well, if we can't use the doors, we should make sure of the escape
tunnel. Duke's shoulder isn't so good. My ribs are sore but I can
work-today. Tomorrow Duke and I will be stiff and twice as sore. There
are those steel bottles cluttering the hatch and plunder stored in the
hole. Takes work. Boss, I say we've got to be sure of our escape-while
we're still in pretty good shape."

     "I hate to order heavy work. But you've convinced me." Hugh stood
up, suppressing a groan. "Let's get busy."

     "I've got one more suggestion."

     "So?"

     "You ought to sack in. You haven't been to bed at all and you got
banged up pretty hard."

     "I'm okay. Duke has a bad shoulder, you've got cracked ribs. And
there's heavy work to be done."

     "I plan to use block and tackle to skid those bottles aside.
Barbara can help. She's husky, for a girl."

     "Certainly I can," agreed Barbara. "I'm bigger than Joe is. Excuse
me, Joe."

     "No argument. Boss. Hugh. I don't like to emphasize it but I
thought of this. You admit you're tired. Not surprising, you've been on
the go twenty-four hours. Do you mind my saying that I would feel more
confident you could get us through if you would rest?"

     "He's right, Hugh."

     "Barbara, you haven't had any sleep."

     "I don't have to make decisions. But I'll lie down and Joe can call
me when he needs me. Okay, Joe?"

     "Fine, Barbara."

     Hugh grinned. "Ganging up on me. All right, I'll take a nap."

     A few minutes later he was in the bottom bunk in the men's
dormitory, his feet braced against the footboard. He closed his eyes and
was asleep before he could get his worries organized.

 

     Duke and Joe found that five of the bolts of the inner door were
stuck. "We'll let them be," Joe decided. "We can always drift them back
with a sledgehammer. Let's crank back the armor door."

     The armor door, beyond the bolted door, was intended to withstand
as much blast as the walls. It was cranked into place, or out, by a rack
and gear driven by a long crank.

     Joe could not budge it. Duke, heavier by forty pounds, put his
weight on it-no results. Then they leaned on it together.

     "Frozen."

     "Yeah."

     "Joe, you mentioned a sledgehammer."

     The young Negro frowned. "Duke, I would rather your father tried
that. We could break the crank. O~ a tooth on the rack."

     "The trouble is, we're trying to crank a ton or so of door uphill,
when it was meant to move on the level."

     "Yes. But this door always has been pesky."

     "What do we do?"

     "We get at the escape tunnel."

     A block and tackle was fastened to a hook in the ceiling; the giant
bottles were hauled out of the jumble and stacked, with Barbara and
Karen heaving on the line and the men guiding them and then bracing them
so that the stack could not roll. When the middle of the floor was clear
they were able to get at the manhole cover to the tunnel. It was the
massive, heavy-traffic sort and the hook in the ceiling was for lifting it.

     It came up, creaking. It swung suddenly because of the 300
out-of-plumb of everything, taking a nick out of Duke's shin and an oath
out of Duke.

     The hole was packed with provisions. The girls dug them out, Karen,
being smaller, going down inside as they got deeper and Barbara stacking
the stuff.

     Karen stuck her head up. "Hey! Water Boss! There's canned water here."

     "Well, goody for me!"

     Joe said, "I had forgotten that. This hatch hasn't been opened
since the shelter was stocked."

     "Joe, shall I knock out the braces?"

     "I'll get 'em. You clear out the supplies. Duke, this isn't armored
the way the door is. Those braces hold a piece of boiler plate against
the opening, with the supplies behind it and the manhole cover holding
it all down. Inside the tunnel, at ten foot intervals, are walls of
sandbags, and the mouth has dirt over it. Your father said the idea was
to cofferdam a blast. Let it in, slow it down, a piece at a time."

     "We'll find those sandbags jammed against that boiler plate."

     "If so, we'll dig 'em out."

     "Why didn't he use real armor?"

     "He thought this was safer. You saw what happened to the doors. I
would hate to have to pry loose a steel barrier in that tunnel."

     "I see. Joe, I'm sorry I ever called this place a 'hole in the
ground.'"

     "Well, it isn't. It's a machine-a survival machine."

     "I'm through," Karen announced. "Some gentleman help me up. Or you,
Duke."

     "I'll put the lid on with you under it." Duke helped his sister to
climb out.

     Joe climbed down, flinching at the strain on his ribs. Dr.
Livingstone had been superintending. Now he followed his friend into the
hole, using Joe's shoulders as a landing.

     "Duke, if you'll hand me that sledge- Stay out of the way, Doc. Get
your tail down."

     "Want me to take him?" asked Karen.

     "No, he likes to be in on things. Somebody hold the light." The
braces were removed and piled on the floor above.

     "Duke, I need the tackle now. I don't want to hoist the plate. Just
take its weight so I can swing it back. It's heavy."

     "Here it comes."

     "That's good. Doc! Darn you, Doc! Get out from under my feet! Just
a steady strain, Duke. Somebody hand me the flashlight. I'll swing her
back and have a look."

     "And get a face full of isotopes."

     "Have to chance it. A touch more- That's got her, she's swinging free."

     Then Joe didn't say anything. At last Duke said, "What do you see?"

     "I'm not sure. Let me swing it back, and hand me one brace."

     "Right over your head. Joe, what do you see?"

     The Negro was swinging the plate back when suddenly he grunted.
"Doe! Doe, come back here! That little scamp! Between my legs and into
the tunnel. Doc!"

     "He can't get far."

     "Well- Karen, will you go wake your father?"

     "Damn it, Joe! What do you see?" "Duke, I don't know. That's why I
need Hugh." "I'm coming down."

     "There isn't room. I'm coming up, so Hugh can go down."

     Hugh arrived as Joe scrambled out. "Joe, what do you have?"

     "Hugh, I would rather you looked yourself."

     "Well- I should have built a ladder for this. Give me a hand." Hugh
went down, removed the brace, swung back the plate.

     He stared even longer than Joe had, then called up. "Duke! Let's
heave this plate out."

     "What is it, Dad?"

     "Get the plate out, then you can come down." It was hoisted out;
father and son exchanged places. Duke stared down the tunnel. "That's
enough, Duke. Here's a hand."

     Duke rejoined them; his father said, "What do you think?"

     "I don't believe it."

     "Daddy," Karen said tensely, "somebody is going to talk, or I'm
going to wrap this sledgehammer around somebody's skull."

     "Yes, baby. Uh, there's room for you girls to go down together."

     Barbara was handed down by Duke and Hugh, she helped Karen down
over her. Both girls scrunched down and looked.

     Karen said softly, "I'll be goldarned!" She started crawling into
the tunnel.

     Hugh called out, "Baby! Come back!" Karen did not answer. He added,
"Barbara, tell me what you see."

     "I see," Barbara said slowly, "a beautiful wooded hillside, green
trees, bushes, and a lovely sunny day."

     "That's what we saw."

     "But it's impossible."

     "Yes."

     "Karen is outside. The tunnel isn't more than eight feet long.
She's holding Dr. Livingstone. She says, 'Come on out!" "Tell her to get
away from the mouth. It's probably radioactive."

     "Karen! Get away from the tunnel! Hugh, what time is it?"

     "Just past seven."

     "Well, it's more like noon outside. I think."

     "I've quit thinking." "Hugh, I want to go out."

     "Uh- Oh, hell! Don't tarry at the mouth. And be careful."

     "I will." She started to crawl.

 

 

 

Chapter 4

 

 

 

     Hugh turned to his deputy. "Joe, I'm going out. Get me a forty-five
and a belt. I shouldn't have let those girls go out unarmed." He eased
himself down the hole. "You two guard the place."

     His son said, "Against what? There's nothing to guard in here."

     His father hesitated. "I don't know. Just a spooky feeling. All
right, come along. But arm yourself. Joe!"

     "Coming!"

     "Joe, arm Duke and yourself. Then wait until we get outside. If we
don't come back right away, use your judgment. This situation I hadn't
anticipated. It just can't be."

     "But it is."

     "So it is, Duke." Hugh buckled on the pistol, dropped to his knees.
Framed in the tunnel's mouth was still the vision of lush greenness
where there should have been blasted countryside and crater glass. He
started to crawl.

     He stood up and moved away from the mouth, then looked around.

     "Daddy! Isn't this lovely!"

     Karen was below him on a slope that ran down to a stream. Across it
the land rose and was covered with trees. On this side was a
semi-clearing. The sky was blue, sunlight warm and bright, and there was
no sign of war's devastation, nor any sign of man-not a building, a
road, a path, no contrails in the sky. It was wilderness, and there was
nothing that he recognized.

     "Daddy, I'm going down to the creek."

     "Come here! Where's Barbara?"

     "Up here, Hugh." He turned and saw her up the slope, above the
shelter. "I'm trying to figure out what happened. What do you think?"

     The shelter sat cocked on the slope, a huge square monolith. Dirt
clung to it save where the tunnel had cracked off and a jagged place
where the stairwell had been. The armor door was exposed just above him.

     "I don't think," he admitted.

     Duke emerged, dragging a rifle. He stood up, looked around, and
said nothing.

     Barbara and Karen joined them. Dr.-Livingstone-I-Presume came
bounding up to tag Hugh on the ankle and dash away. Obviously the
Persian gave the place full approval; it was just right for cats.

     Duke said, "I give up. Tell me."

     Hugh did not answer. Karen said, "Daddy, why can't I go down to the
creek? I'm going to take a bath. I stink."

     "It won't hurt you to stink. I'm confused. I don't want to be
confused still more by worrying about your drowning-"

     "It's shallow."

     "-or eaten by a bear, or falling in quicksand. You girls go inside,
arm yourselves, and then come out if you want to. But stick close and
keep your eyes peeled. Tell Joe to come out."

     "Yes, sir." The girls went.

     "What do you think, Duke?"

     "Well . . . I reserve my opinion."

     "If you have one, it's more than I have. Duke, I'm stonkered. I
planned for all sorts of things. This wasn't on the list. If you have
opinions, for God's sake spill them."

     "Well- This looks like mountain country in Central America. Of
course that's impossible."

     "No point in worrying about whether it's possible. Suppose it was
Central America. What would you watch for?"

     "Let me see. Might be cougars. Snakes certainly. Tarantulas and
scorpions. Malaria mosquitoes. You mentioned bears."

     "I meant bears as a symbol. We're going to have to watch
everything, every minute, until we know what we're up against."

     Joe came out, carrying a rifle. He kept quiet and looked around.
Duke said, "We won't starve. Off to the left down by the stream."

     Hugh looked. A dappled fawn, hardly waist high, was staring at
them, apparently unafraid. Duke said, "Shall I drop it?" He raised his
rifle.

     "No. Unless you are dead set on fresh meat."

     "All right. Pretty thing, isn't it?"

     "Very. But it's no North American deer I ever saw. Duke? Where are
we? And how did we get here?"

     Duke gave a lopsided grin. "Dad, you appointed yourself Fuehrer.
I'm not supposed to think."

     "Oh, rats!"

     "Anyhow, I don't know. Maybe the Russkis developed a hallucination
bomb."

     "But would we all see the same thing?"

     "No opinion. But if I had shot that deer, Ill bet we could have
eaten it."

     "I think so, too. Joe? Ideas, opinions, suggestions?"

     Joe scratched his head. "Mighty pretty country. But I'm a city boy."

     "One thing you can do, Hugh."

     "What, Duke?"

     "Your little radio. Try it."

     "Good idea." Hugh crawled inside, caught Karen about to climb down,
sent her back for it. While he waited, he wondered what he had that was
suitable for a ladder? Chinning themselves in a six-foot manhole was
tedious.

     The radio picked up static but nothing else. Hugh switched it off.
"We'll try it tonight. I've gotten Mexico with it at night, even
Canada." He frowned. "Something ought to be on the air. Unless they
smeared us completely."

     "Dad, you aren't thinking straight."

     "How, Duke?"

     "This area did not get smeared."

     "That's why I can't understand a radio silence."

     "Yet Mountain Springs really caught it. Ergo, we aren't in Mountain
Springs."

     "Who said we were?" Karen answered. "There's nothing like this in
Mountain Springs. Nor the whole state."

     Hugh frowned. "I guess that's obvious." He looked at the
shelter-gross, huge, massive. "But where are we?"

     "Don't you read comic books, Daddy? We're on another planet."

     "Don't joke, baby girl. I'm worried."

     "I wasn't joking. There is nothing like this within a thousand
miles of home-yet here we are. Might as well be another planet. The one
we had was getting used up."

     "Hugh," Joe said, "it sounds silly. But I agree with Karen."

     "Why, Joe?"

     "Well, we're someplace. What happens when an H-bomb explodes dead
on you?"

     "You're vaporized."

     "I don't feel vaporized. And I can't see that big hunk of concrete
sailing a thousand miles or so, and crashing down with nothing to show
for it but cracked ribs and a hurt shoulder. But Karen's idea-" He
shrugged. "Call it the fourth dimension. That last big one nudged us
through the fourth dimension."

     "Just what I said, Daddy. We're on a strange planet! Let's explore!"

     "Slow down, honey. As for another planet- Well, there isn't any
rule saying we have to know where we are when we don't. The problem is
to cope."

     Barbara said, "Karen, I don't see how this can be anything but Earth."

     "Why? Spoilsport."

     "Well-" Barbara chucked a pebble at a tree. "That's a eucalyptus,
and an acacia beyond it. Not at all like Mountain Springs but a normal
grouping of tropical and subtropical flora. Unless your 'new planet'
evolved plants just like Earth, this has to be Earth."

     "Spoilsport," Karen repeated. "Why shouldn't plants evolve the same
way on another planet?"

     "Well, that would be as remarkable as finding the same-"

     "Hubert! Hubert! Where are you? I can't find you!" Grace Farnham's
voice echoed out the tunnel.

     Hugh ducked into the tunnel. "Coming!"

 

     They ate lunch under a tree a little distance from the shelter.
Hugh decided that the tunnel had been buried so deeply that the chance
of its mouth being more radioactive than the interior was negligible. As
for the roof, he was not certain. So he placed a dosimeter (the only
sort of radiation instrument that had come through the pummeling) on top
of the shelter to compare it later with one inside. He was relieved to
see that the dosimeters agreed that they had suffered less than lethal
dosage-although large-and that they checked each other.

     The only other precaution he took was for them to keep guns by
them-all but his wife. Grace Farnham "couldn't stand guns," and resented
having to eat with guns in sight.

     But she ate with good appetite. Duke had built a fire and they were
blessed with hot coffee, hot canned beef, hot peas, hot canned sweet
potatoes, and canned fruit salad-and cigarettes with no worry about air
or fire.

     "That was lovely," Grace admitted. "Hubert dear? Do you know what
it would take to make it just perfect? You don't approve of drinking in
the middle of the day but these are special circumstances and my nerves
are still a teensy bit on edge-so, Joseph, if you will just run back
inside and fetch a bottle of that Spanish brandy-"

     "Grace."

     "What, dear? -then all of us could celebrate our miraculous escape.
You were saying?"

     "I'm not sure there is any."

     "What? Why, we stored two cases of it!"

     "Most of the liquor was broken. That brings up something else.
Duke, you are out of a job as water boss. I'd like you to take over as
bartender. There are at least two unbroken fifths. Whatever you find,
split it six ways and make it share and share alike, whether it's
several bottles each, or just a part of a bottle."

     Mrs. Farnham looked blank, Duke looked uneasy. Karen said hastily,
"Daddy, you know what I said."

     "Oh, yes. Duke, your sister is on the wagon. So hold her share as a
medicinal reserve. Unless she changes her mind."

     "I don't want the job," said Duke.

     "We have to divide up the chores, Duke. Oh yes, do the same with
cigarettes. When they are gone, they're gone, whereas I have hopes that
we can distill liquor later." He turned to his wife. "Why not have a
Miltown, dear?"

     "Drugs! Hubert Farnham, are you telling me that I can't have a drink?"

     "Not at all. At least two fifths came through. Your share would be
about a half pint. If you want a drink, go ahead."

     "Well! Joseph, run inside and fetch me a bottle of brandy."

     "No!" her husband countermanded. "If you want it, Grace, fetch it
yourself."

     "Oh, shucks, Hugh, I don't mind."

     "I do. Grace, Joe's ribs are cracked. It hurts him to climb. You
can manage the climb with those boxes as steps-and you're the only one
who wasn't hurt."

     "That's not true!"

     "Not a scratch. Everybody else was bruised or worse. Now about
jobs- I want you to take over as cook. Karen will be your assistant.
Okay, Karen?"

     "Certainly, Daddy."

     "It will keep you both busy. We'll build a grill and Dutch oven,
but it will be cook over a campfire and wash dishes in the creek for a
while."

     "So? And will you please tell me, Mr. Farnham, what Joseph is going
to do in the meantime? To earn his wages?"

     "Will you please tell me how we'll pay wages? Dear, dear- can't you
see that things have changed?"

     "Don't be preposterous! Joseph will get every cent coming to him
and he knows it-just as soon as this mess is straightened out. After
all, we've saved his life. And we've always been good to him, he won't
mind waiting. Will you, Joseph?"

     "Grace! Quiet down and listen. Joe is no longer our servant. He is
our partner in adversity. We'll never pay him wages again. Quit acting
like a child and face the facts. We're broke. We're never going to have
any money again. Our house is gone. My business is gone. The Mountain
Exchange Bank is gone. We're wiped out . . . save for what we stored in
the shelter. But we are lucky. We're alive and by some miracle have a
chance of scratching a living out of the ground. Lucky. Do you understand?"

     "I understand you are using it as an excuse to bully me!"

     "You've merely been assigned a job to fit your talents."

     "Kitchen drudge! I was your kitchen slave for twenty-five years!
That's long enough. I won't do it! Do you understand me?"

     "You are wrong on both points. You've had a maid most of our
married life . . . and Karen washed dishes from the time she could see
over the sink. Granted, we had lean years. Now we're going to have more
lean years-and you're going to help. Grace, you are a fine cook when you
want to be. You will cook. . . or you won't eat."

     "Oh!" She burst into tears and fled into the shelter.

     Her behind was disappearing when Duke got up to follow. His father
stopped him. "Duke!"

     "Yes."

     "One word and you can join your mother. I'm going exploring, I want
you to go with me."

     Duke hesitated. "All right."

     "We'll start shortly. I think your job should be 'hunter.' You're a
better shot than I am and Joe has never hunted. What do you think?"

     "Uh- All right."

     "Good. Well, go soothe her down and, Duke, see if you can make her
see the facts."

     "Maybe. But I agree with Mother. You were bullying her."

     "As may be. Go ahead."

     Duke turned abruptly and left. Karen said quietly, "I think so too,
Daddy. You were bullying."

     "I intended to. I judged it called for bullying. Karen, if I hadn't
tromped on it, she would do no work. . . and would order Joe around,
treat him as a hired cook."

     "Shucks, Hugh, I don't mind cooking. It was a pleasure to rustle
lunch."

     "She's a better cook than you are, Joe, and she's going to cook.
Don't let me catch you fetching and carrying for her."

     The younger man grinned. "You won't catch me."

     "Better not. Or I'll skin you and nail it to the barn. Barbara,
what do you know about farming?"

     "Very little."

     "You're a botanist."

     "No, I simply might have been one, someday."

     "Which makes you eight times as much of a farmer as the rest of us.
I can barely tell a rose from a dandelion; Duke knows even less and
Karen thinks you dig potatoes out of gravy. You heard Joe say he was a
city boy. But we have seeds and a small supply of fertilizers. Also
garden tools and books about farming. Look over what we've got and find
a spot for a garden. Joe and I will do the spading and such. But you
will have to boss."

     "All right. Any flower seeds?"

     "How did you know?"

     "I just hoped."

     "Annuals and perennials both. Don't look for a spot this afternoon;
I don't want you girls away from the shelter until we know the hazards.
Joe, today we should accomplish two things, a ladder and two privies.
Barbara, how are you as a carpenter?"

     "Just middlin'. I can drive a nail."

     "Don't let Joe do what you can do; those ribs have to heal. But we
need a ladder. Karen, my little flower, you have the privilege of
digging privies."

     "Gosh. Thanks!"

     "Just straddle ditches, one as the powder room, the other for us
coarser types. Joe and I will build proper Chic Sales jobs later. Then
we'll tackle a log cabin. Or a stone-wall job."

     "I was wondering if you planned to do any work, Daddy."

     "Brainpower, darling. Management. Supervision. Can't you see me
sweating?" He yawned. "Well, a pleasant afternoon, all. I'll stroll down
to the club, have a Turkish bath, then enjoy a long, tall planter's punch."

     "Daddy, go soak your head. Privies, indeed!"

     "The Kappas would be proud of you, dear."

     Hugh and his son left a half hour later. "Joe," Hugh cautioned, "we
plan to be back before dark but if we get caught, we'll keep a fire
going all night and come back tomorrow. If you do have to search for us,
don't go alone; take one of the girls. No, take Karen; Barbara has no
shoes, just some spike heeled sandals. Damn. Moccasins we'll have to
make. Got it?"

     "Sure."

     "We'll head for that hill-that one. I want to get high enough to
get the lay of the land-and maybe spot signs of civilization." They set
out-rifles, canteens, hand ax, machete, matches, iron rations,
compasses, binoculars, mountain boots, coveralls. Coveralls and boots
fitted Duke as well as Hugh; Duke found that his father had stocked
clothes for him.

     They took turns, with the man following blazing trail and counting
paces, the leader keeping lookout, compass direction, and record.

     The high hill Hugh had picked was across the stream. They explored
its bank and found a place to wade. Everywhere they flushed game. The
miniature deer were abundant and apparently had never been hunted. By
man, at least- Duke saw a mountain lion and twice they saw bears.

     It seemed to be about three o'clock local time as they approached
the summit. The climb was steep, cluttered with undergrowth, and neither
man was in training. When they reached the flattish summit Hugh wanted
to throw himself on the ground.

     Instead he looked around. To the east the ground dropped off. He
stared out over miles of prairie.

     He could see no sign of human life. He adjusted his binoculars and
started searching. He saw moving figures, decided that they were
antelope-or cattle; he made mental note that these herds must be
watched. Later, later- "Hugh?"

     He lowered his binoculars. "Yes, Duke?"

     "See that peak? It's fourteen thousand one hundred and ten feet high."

     "I won't argue."

     "That's Mount James. Dad, we're home!"

     "What do you mean?"

     "Look southwest. Those three gendarmes on that profile. The middle
one is where I broke my leg when I was thirteen. That pointed mountain
between there and Mount James- Hunter's Horn. Can't you see? The skyline
is as distinctive as a fingerprint. This is Mountain Springs!"

     Hugh stared. This skyline he knew. His bedroom window had been
planned to let him see it at dawn; many sunsets he had watched it from
his roof.

     "Yes."

     "Yes," Duke agreed. "Damned if I know how. But as I figure it"-he
stomped the ground-"we're on the high reservoir. Where it ought to be.
And-" His brow wrinkled. "As near as I can tell, our shelter is smack on
our lot. Dad, we didn't go anywhere!"

     Hugh took out the notebook in which were recorded paces and
compasses courses, did some arithmetic. "Yes. Within the limits of error."

     "Well? How do you figure it?"

     Hugh looked at the skyline. "I don't. Duke, how much daylight do we
have?"

     "Well. . . three hours. The sun will be behind the mountains in two."

     "It took two hours to get here; we should make it back in less. Do
you have any cigarettes?"

 

     "May I have one? Charged against me of course. I would like to rest
about one cigarette, then start back." He looked around. "It's open up
here. I don't think a bear would approach us." He placed his rifle and
belt on the ground, settled down.

     Duke offered a cigarette to his father, took one himself. "Dad,
you're a cold fish. Nothing excites you."

     "So? I'm so excitable that I had to learn never to give into it."

     "Doesn't seem that way to other people." They smoked in silence,
Duke seated, Hugh sprawled out. He was close to exhaustion and wished
that he did not have to hike back.

     Presently Duke added, "Besides that, you enjoy bullying." His
father answered, "I suppose so, if you class what I do as bullying. No
one ever does anything but what he wants to do-'enjoys'-within the
possibilities open to him. If I change a tire, it's because I enjoy it
more than being stranded."

     "Don't get fancy. You enjoy bullying Mother. You enjoyed spanking
me as a kid. . . until Mother put her foot down and made you stop."

     His father said, "We had better start back." He reached for his
belt and rifle.

     "Just a second. I want to show you something. Never mind your gear,
this won't take a moment."

     Hugh stood up. "What is it?"

     "Just this. Your Captain Bligh act is finished." He clouted his
father. "That's for bullying Mother!" He clouted him from the other side
and harder, knocking his father off his feet. "And that's for having
that nigger pull a gun on me!"

     Hugh Farnham lay where he had fallen. "Not 'nigger,' Duke. Negro."

     "He's a Negro as long as he behaves himself. Pulling a gun on me
makes him a goddam nigger. You can get up. I won't hit you again."

     Hugh Farnham got to his feet. "Let's start back."

     "Is that all you've got to say? Go ahead. Hit me. I won't hit back."

 

     "I didn't break my parole. I waited until we left the shelter."

     "Conceded. Shall I lead? Better, perhaps."

     "Do you think I'm afraid you might shoot me in the back? Look, Dad,
I had to do it!"

     "Did you?"

     "Hell, yes. For my own self-respect."

     "Very well." Hugh buckled on his belt, picked up his gun, and
headed for the last blaze.

     They hiked in silence. At last Duke said, "Dad?"

     "Yes, Duke?"

     "I'm sorry."

     "Forget it."

     They went on, found where they had forded the stream, crossed it.
Hugh hurried, as it was growing darker. Duke closed up again. "Just one
thing, Dad. Why didn't you assign Barbara as cook? She's the freeloader.
Why pick on Mother?"

     Hugh took his time in answering. "Barbara is no more a freeloader
than you are, Duke, and cooking is the only thing Grace knows. Or were
you suggesting that she loaf while the rest of us work?"

     "No. Oh, we all have to pitch in-granted. But no more bullying, no
more bawling Mother out in public. Understand me?"

     "Duke."

     "Yeah?"

     "I've been studying karate three afternoons a week the past year."

     "So?"

     "Don't try it again. Shooting me in the back is safer."

     "I hear you."

     "Until you decide to shoot me, it would be well to accept my
leadership. Or do you wish to assume the responsibility?"

     "Are you offering it?"

     "I am not in a position to. Perhaps the group would accept you.
Your mother would. Possibly your sister would prefer you. Concerning
Barbara and Joe, I offer no opinion."

     "How about you, Dad?"

     "I won't answer that; I owe you nothing. But until you decide to
make a bid for leadership, I expect the same willing discipline you
showed under parole."

     "'Willing discipline' indeed!"

     "In the long run there is no other sort. I can't quell a mutiny
every few hours-and I've had two from you plus an utter lack of
discipline from your mother. No leader can function on those terms. So I
will assume your willing discipline. That includes no interference
should I decide again to use what you call 'bullying.'"

     "Now see here, I told you I would not stand for-"

     "Quiet! Unless you make up your mind to that, your safest choice is
to shoot me in the back. Don't come at me with bare hands or risk giving
me a chance to shoot first. At the next sign of trouble, Duke, I will
kill you. If possible. One of us will surely be killed."

     They trudged along in silence, Mr. Farnham never looking back. At
last Duke said, "Dad, for Christ's sake, why can't you run things
democratically? I don't want to boss things, I simply want you to be
fair about it."

     "Mmm, you don't want to boss. You want to be a backseat driver-with
a veto over the driver."

     "Nuts! I simply want things run democratically."

     "You do? Shall we vote on whether Grace is to work like the rest of
us? Whether she shall hog the liquor? Shall we use Robert's Rules of
Order? Should she withdraw while we debate it? Or should she stay and
defend herself against charges of indolence and drunkenness? Do you wish
to submit your mother to such ignominy?"

     "Don't be silly!"

     "I am trying to find out what you mean by 'democratically.' If you
mean putting every decision to a vote, I am willing-if you will bind
yourself to abide by every majority decision. You're welcome to run for
chairman. I'm sick of the responsibility and I know that Joe does not
like being my deputy."

     "That's another thing. Why should Joe have any voice in these matters?"

     "I thought you wanted to do it 'democratically'?"

     "Yes, but he is-"

     "What, Duke? A 'nigger'? Or a servant?"

     "You've got a nasty way of putting things."

     "You've got nasty ideas. We'll try formal democracy-rules of order,
debate, secret ballot, everything-any time you want to try such
foolishness. Especially any time you want to move a vote of no
confidence and take over the leadership . . . and I'm so bitter as to
hope that you succeed. In the meantime we do have democracy."

     "How do you figure?"

     "I'm serving by consent of the majority-four to two, I think. But
that doesn't suit me; I want it to be unanimous, I can't put up
indefinitely with wrangling from the minority. You and your mother, I
mean. I want it to be five to one before we get back, with your
assurance that you will not interfere in my efforts to persuade, or
cajole, or bully, your mother into accepting her share of the load-until
you care to risk a vote of no confidence."

     "You're asking me to agree to that?"

     "No, I'm telling you. Willing discipline on your part . . or at the
next clash one of us will be killed. I won't give you the slightest
warning. That's why your safest course is to shoot me in the back."

     "Quit talking nonsense! You know I won't shoot you in the back."

     "So? I will shoot you in the back or anywhere at the next hint of
trouble. Duke, I can see only one alternative. If you find it impossible
to give willing disciplined consent, if you don't think you can displace
me, if you can't bring yourself to kill me, if you don't care to risk a
clash in which one of us will be killed, then there is still a peaceful
solution."

     "What is it?"

     "Any time you wish, you can leave. I'll give you a rifle,
ammunition, salt, matches, a knife, whatever you find needful. You don't
deserve them but I won't turn you out with nothing."

     Duke gave a bitter laugh. "Sending me out to play Robinson Crusoe..
. and leaving all the women with you!"

     "Oh, no! Any who wish are free to go. With a fair share of anything
and some to boot. All three women if you can sell the idea."

     "I'll think about it."

     "Do. And do a little politicking and size up your chances of
winning a vote against me 'democratically'-while being extraordinarily
careful not to cross wills with me and thereby bring on a showdown
sooner than you wish. I warn you, I'm feeling very short-tempered; you
loosened one of my teeth."

     "I didn't mean to."

     "That wasn't the way it felt. There's the shelter; you can start
that 'willing discipline' by pretending that we've had a lovely afternoon."

     "Look, Dad, if you won't mention-"

     "Shut up. I'm sick of you."

     As they neared the shelter Karen saw them and yoo-hooed; Joe and
Barbara came crawling out the tunnel. Karen waved her shovel. "Come see
what I've done!"

     She had dug privies on each side of the shelter. Saplings formed
frameworks which had been screened by tacking cardboard from liquor
cases. Seats had been built of lumber remnants from the tank room.
"Well?" demanded Karen. "Aren't they gorgeous?"

     "Yes," agreed Hugh. "Much more lavish than I had expected." He
refrained from saying that they had cost most of the lumber.

     "I didn't do it all. Barbara did the carpentry. You should hear her
swear when she hits her thumb."

     "You hurt your thumb, Barbara?"

     "It'll get well. Come try the ladder."

     "Sure thing." He started inside; Joe stopped him. "Hugh, while
we've still got light, how about seeing something?"

     "All right. What?"

     "The shelter. You've been talking about building a cabin. Suppose
we do: what do we have? A mud floor and a roof that leaks, no glass for
windows and no doors. Seems to me the shelter is better."

     "Well, perhaps," agreed Hugh. "I had thought we could use it while
pioneering, if we had to."

     "I don't think it's too radioactive, Hugh. That dosimeter should
have gone sky-high if the roof is really 'hot.' It hasn't."

     "That's good news. But, Joe, look at it. A slant of thirty degrees
is uncomfortable. We need a house with a level floor."

     "That's what I mean. Hugh, that hydraulic jack-it's rated at thirty
tons. How much does the shelter weigh?"

     "Oh. Let me think how many yards of mix we used and how much
steel." Hugh pondered it, got out his notebook. "Call it two hundred
fifty tons."

     "Well, it was an idea."

     "Maybe it's a good idea." Hugh prowled around the shelter, a block
twenty feet square and twelve high, sizing up angles, estimating yardages.

     "It can be done," Hugh decided. "We dig under on the uphill side,
to the center line, cutting out enough to let that side settle down
level. Damn, I wish we had power tools."

     "How long will it take?"

     "Two men could do it in a week if they didn't run into boulders.
With no dynamite a boulder can be a problem."

     "Too much of a problem?"

     "Always some way to cope. Let's pray we don't run into solid rock.
As we get it dug out, we brace it with logs. At the end we snag the logs
out with block and tackle. Then we put the jack under the downhill side
and tilt it into place, shore it up and fill with what we've removed.
Lots of sweat."

     "I'll start bright and early tomorrow."

     "You will like hell. Not until your ribs have healed. I will start
tomorrow, with two husky girls. Plus Duke, if his shoulder isn't sore,
after he shoots us a deer; we've got to conserve canned goods. Reminds
me-what was done with the dirty cans?"

     "Buried 'em."

     "Dig them up and wash them. A tin can is more valuable than gold;
we'll use them for all sorts of things. Let's go in. I've still to
admire the ladder."

     The ladder was two trimmed saplings, with treads cut from boards
and notched and nailed. Hugh reflected again that lumber had been used
too lavishly; treads should have been fashioned from limbs. Damn it,
there were so many things that could no longer be ordered by picking up
a telephone. Those rolls of Scottissue, one at each privy- They
shouldn't be left outdoors; what if it rained? All too soon it would be
either a handful of leaves, or do without.

     So many, many things they had always taken for granted! Kotex- How
long would their supply last? And what did primitive women use?
Something, no doubt, but what?

     He must warn them that anything manufactured, a scrap of paper, a
dirty rag, a pin, all must be hoarded. Caution them, hound them, nag
them endlessly.

     "That's a beautiful ladder, Barbara!"

     She looked very pleased. "Joe did the hard parts."

     "I did not," Joe denied. "I just gave advice and touched up the
chisel."

     "Well, whoever did it, it's lovely. Now we'll see if it will take
my weight."

     "Oh, it will!" Barbara said proudly.

     The shelter had all lights burning. Have to caution them about
batteries, too. Must tell the girls to look up how to make candles.
"Where's Grace, Karen?"

     "Mother isn't well. She's lying down."

     "So? You had better start dinner." Hugh went into the women's bay,
saw what sort of not-well his wife suffered. She was sleeping heavily,
mouth open, snoring, and was fully dressed. He reached down, peeled back
an eyelid; she did not stir. "Duke."

     "Yes?"

     "Come here. Everybody else outside."

     Duke joined him. Hugh said, "After lunch, did you give Grace a drink?"

     "Huh? You didn't say not to."

     "I wasn't criticizing. How much?"

     "Just a highball. An ounce and a half of Scotch, with water."

     "Does that look like one highball? Try to rouse her."

     Duke tried, then straightened up. "Dad, I know you think I'm a
fool. But I gave her just one drink. Damn it, I'm more opposed to her
drinking than you are!"

     "Take it easy, Duke. I assume that she got at the bottle after you
left."

     "Well, maybe." Duke frowned. "As soon as I found an unbroken bottle
I gave Mother that drink. Then I took inventory. I think I found it all,
unless you have some hidden away-"

     "No, the cases were together. Six cases."

     "Right. I found thirteen unbroken bottles, twelve fifths and a
quart of bourbon. I remember thinking that was two fifths each and the
quart I would keep in reserve. I had opened one bottle of King's Ransom.
I made a pencil mark on it. We'll know if she found it."

     "You hid the liquor?"

     "I stashed it in the upper bunk on the other side; I figured it
would be hard for her to climb up there- I'm not a complete fool, Dad.
She couldn't see me, she was in her bunk. But maybe she guessed."

     "Let's check."

     Thirteen bottles were between springs and mattress; twelve were
unopened, the thirteenth was nearly full. Duke held it up. "See? Right
to the line. But there was another bottle we had a snort from, after
that second bombing. What happened to it?"

     "Barbara and I had some after you went to sleep, Duke. There was
some left. I never saw it again. It was in the tank room."

     "Oh! I did, while we were bailing. Busted. I give up-where did she
get it?"

     "She didn't, Duke."

     "What do you mean?"

     "It wasn't liquor." Hugh went to the medicines drawer, got a bottle
with a broken seal. "Count these Seconal capsules. You had two last night."

     "Yeah."

     "Karen had one at bedtime, one later; Joe had one. Neither Barbara
nor I had any, nor Grace. Five."

     "Hold it, I'm counting."

     His father began to count as Duke pushed them aside.

     "Ninety-one," Duke announced.

     "Check." Hugh put the capsules back. "So she took four."

     "What do we do, Dad? Stomach pump? Emetic?"

     "Nothing."

     "Why, you heartless- She tried to kill herself!"

     "Slow down, Duke. She did nothing of the sort. Four capsules, six
grains, simply produces stupor in a healthy person- and she's healthy as
a horse; she had a physical a month ago. No, she snitched those pills to
get drunk on." Hugh scowled. "An alcohol drunk is bad enough. But people
kill themselves without meaning to with sleeping pills."

     "Dad, what do you mean, 'she took them to get drunk on'?"

     "You don't use them?"

     "I never had one in my life until those two last night."

     "Do you remember how you felt just before you went to sleep? Warm
and happy and woozy?"

     "No. I just lay down and konked out. Next thing I knew I was
against the wall on my shoulders."

     "You haven't developed tolerance for them. Grace knows what they
can do. Drunk, a very happy drunk. I've never known her to take more
than one but she's never been chopped off from liquor before. When a
person eats sleeping pills because he can't get liquor, he's in a bad way."

     "Dad, you should have kept liquor away from her long ago!"

     "How, Duke? Tell her she couldn't have a drink? Take them away from
her at parties? Quarrel with her in public? Fight with her in front of
Joe? Not let her have cash, close out her bank account, see that she had
no credit? Would that have stopped her from pawning furs?"

     "Mother would never have done that."

     "It's typical behavior in such cases. Duke, it is impossible to
keep liquor away from any adult who is determined to have it. The United
States Government wasn't that powerful. I'll go further. It is
impossible for anyone to be responsible for another person's behavior. I
spoke of myself as 'responsible' for this group; that was verbal
shorthand. The most I can door you, or any leader-is to encourage each
one to be responsible for himself."

     Hugh chewed his thumb and looked anguished. "Perhaps my mistake was
in letting her loaf. But she considered me stingy because I let her have
only a houseboy and a cleaning woman. Duke, do you see anything I could
have done short of beating her?"

     "Uh. . . that's beside the point. What do we do now?"

     "So it is, counselor. Well, we keep these pills away from her."

     "And I'm damned well going to chop off the liquor completely!"

     "Oh, I wouldn't."

     "You wouldn't, eh? Did I hear correctly when you said I was liquor
boss?"

     "The decision is up to you. I simply said that I wouldn't. I think
it's a mistake."

     "Well, I don't. Dad, I won't go into the matter of whether you
could, or should, have stopped Mother from getting the way she is. But I
intend to stop it."

     "Very well, Duke. Mmm, she's going to be cut off anyhow in a matter
of days. It might be easier to taper her off. If you decide to, I'll
contribute a bottle from my share. Hell, you can have both of mine. I
like a snort as well as the next man. But Grace needs it."

     "That won't be necessary," his son said crisply. "I'm not going to
let her have any. Get it over with, she'll be well that much sooner."

     "Your decision. May I offer a suggestion?"

     "What?"

     "In the morning, be up before she is. Move the liquor out and bury
it, someplace known only to you. Then have open one bottle at a time and
dispense it by the ounce. Tell the others to drink where she can't see
it. You had better ditch the open bottle outdoors, too."

     "Sounds reasonable."

     "But that makes it all the more urgent to keep sleeping pills away
from her."

     "Bury them?"

     "No. We need them inside, and it's not just sleeping pills.
Demerol. Hypodermic needles. Several drugs, some poisonous and some
addictive and all irreplaceable. If she can't find Seconal-five bottles
of a hundred each, it's bulky-there's no telling what she might get
into. We'll use the vault."

 

     "A little safe let into concrete back of that cupboard. Nothing in
it but birth certificates and such, and some reserve ammo, and two
thousand silver dollars. Toss the money in with the hardware, we'll use
it as metal. The combo is 'July 4th, 1776'-'74-17-76.' Better change it,
Grace may know it."

     "At once!"

     "No rush, she won't wake up. 'Reserve ammo-' Duke, you were liquor
and cigarette boss and now you are drugs boss. I'm going whole hog, you
are rationing officer. Responsible for everything that can't be
replaced: liquor, tobacco, ammunition, nails, toilet tissue, matches,
dry cells, Kleenex, needles-"

     "Good God! Got any more dirty jobs?"

     "Lots of them. Duke, I'm trying to make it each according to his
talents. Joe is too diffident-and he missed obvious economies today.
Karen doesn't think ahead. Barbara feels like a freeloader even though
she's not, she wouldn't crack down. I would, but I'm swamped. You are a
natural for it; you don't hesitate to assert yourself. And you have
foresight when you take the trouble to use it."

     "Thank you too much. All right."

     "The hardest thing to drill into them will be saving every scrap of
metal and paper and cloth and lumber, things Americans have wasted for
years. Fishhooks. Groceries aren't as important; we'll replace them, you
by hunting, Barbara by gardening. Nevertheless, better note what can't
be replaced. Salt. You must ration salt especially."

     "Salt?"

     "Unless you run across a salt lick in hunting. Salt- Damn it, we're
going to have to tan leather. All I used to do with a hide was rub it
with salt and give it to the taxidermist. Is salt necessary?"

     "I don't know."

     "I'll look it up. Damnation, we're going to find that I failed to
stock endless things we'll be miserable without."

     "Dad," Duke admitted, "I think you've done mighty well."

     "So? That's pleasant to hear. We'll manage to-"

     "Daddy!"

     "Yes?" Hugh went to the tank room. Karen's head stuck up out of the
manhole.

     "Daddy, can we please come in? It's dark and scary and something
big chased Doc in. Joe won't let us until you say."

     "Sorry, Baby. Everybody come in. And we'll put the lid on."

     "Yes, sir. But Daddy, you ought to look outside. Stars. The Milky
Way like a neon sign! And the Big Dipper-so maybe this isn't another
planet? Or would we still see the Big Dipper?"

     "I'm not certain." He recalled that the discovery that they were
still in James County, Mountain Springs area, had not been shared. But
Duke must tell it; it was his deduction. "Duke, want to take a look
before we close up?"

     "Thanks, I've seen a star."

     "As you wish." Hugh went outside, waited while his eyes adjusted,
saw that Karen was right: Never before had he seen the heavens on a
clear mountain night with no other light, nor trace of smog, to dim its
glory.

     "Beautiful!"

     Karen slipped her hand into his. "Yes," she agreed. "But I could
use some streetlights. There are things out there. And we heard coyotes."

     "There are bears and Duke saw a mountain lion. Joe, better keep the
cat in at night, and try to keep him close in the daytime."

     "He won't go far, he's timid. And something just taught him a lesson."

     "And me, too!" announced Karen. "Bears! Come, Barbie, let's go in.
Daddy, if the Moon comes up, this must be Earth- and I'll never trust a
comic book again."

     "Go ask your brother."

     Duke's discovery was the main subject at dinner. Karen's
disappointment was offset by her interest in how they had mislaid
Mountain Springs. "Duke, are you sure you saw what you thought you saw?"

     "No possible mistake," Hugh answered for him. "If it weren't for
the trees, you could have spotted it. We had to climb Reservoir Hill to
get a clear view."

     "You were gone all that time just to Reservoir Hill? Why, that's
only five minutes away!"

     "Duke, explain to your sister about automobiles."

     "I think the bomb did it," Barbara said suddenly.

     "Why, certainly, Barb. The question is how?"

     "I mean the enormous H-bomb the Russians claimed to have in orbit.
The one they called the 'Cosmic Bomb.' I think it hit us."

     "Go on, Barbara."

     "Well, the first bomb was awful and the second one was bad; they
almost burned us up. But the third one just hit us whammy! and then no
noise, no heat, no rumbling, and the radioactivity got less instead of
worse. Here's my notion:

     You've heard of parallel worlds? A million worlds side by side,
almost alike but not quite? Worlds where Elizabeth married Essex and
Mark Anthony hated redheads? And Ben Franklin got electrocuted with his
kite? Well, this is one."

     "First automobiles and now Benjamin Franklin. I'll go watch Ben Casey."

     "Like this, Karen. The Cosmic Bomb hits us, dead on- and kicks us
into the next world. One exactly like the one we were in, except that it
never had men in it."

     "I'm not sure I like a world with no men. I'd rather have a strange
planet, with warlords riding thoats. Or is it zitidars?"

     "What do you think of my theory, Hugh?"

     "I'm keeping an open mind. I'll go this far: We should not count on
finding other human beings."

     "I go for your theory, Barbara," Duke offered. "It accounts for the
facts. Squeezed out like a melon seed. Pht!"

     "And we landed here."

     Duke shrugged. "Let it be known as the Barbara Wells Theory of
Cosmic Transportation and stand adopted. Here we are; we're stuck with
it-and I'm going to bed. Who sleeps where, Hugh?"

     "Just a second. Folks, meet the Rationing Officer. Take a bow,
Duke." Hugh explained the austerity program. "Duke will work it out but
that's the idea. For example, I noticed a bent nail on the ground in the
powder room. That calls for being spread-eagled and flogged. For a
serious offense, such as wasting a match, it's keelhauling. Second
offense-hang him at the yardarm!"

     "Gee! Do we get to watch?"

     "Shut up, Karen. No punishments, just the miserable knowledge that
you have deprived the rest of something necessary to life, health, or
comfort. So don't give Duke any back talk. I want to make another
assignment. Baby, you know shorthand."

     "That's putting it strongly. Mr. Gregg wouldn't think so."

     "Hugh, I take shorthand. What do you want?"

     "Okay, Barbara, you are historian. Today is Day One. Or start with
the calendar we are used to, but we may adjust it; those were winter
stars. Every night jot down the events and put it in longhand later.
Your title is Keeper of the Flame. As soon as possible, you really will
be Keeper of the Flame; we will have to light a fire, then bank it every
night. Sorry to have held you up, Duke."

     "I'll sleep in the tank room, Hugh. You take a bunk."

     "Wait a minute. Buddy, would you stay up ten minutes longer? Daddy,
could Barbara and I use the tank room for a spit bath? May we have that
much water? A girl who digs privies needs a bath."

     "Sure, Sis," Duke agreed.

     "Water is no problem," Hugh told her. "But you can bathe in the
stream in the morning. Just one thing: Whenever anyone is bathing,
someone should stand guard. I wasn't fooling about bears."

     Karen shivered. "I didn't think you were. But that reminds me,
Daddy- Do we dash out to the powder room? Or hold it all night? I'm not
sure I can. But I'll try-rather than play tag with bears!"

     "I thought the toilet was still set up?"

     "Well.. . I thought, with brand-new outside plumbing-"

     "Of course not."

     "I feel better. Okay, buddy boy, give Barb and me a crack at the
john and you can go to bed."

     "No bath?"

     "If we bathe, we can bathe in the girls' dorm after the rest of you
go to bed. Thereby sparing your blushes."

     "I don't blush."

     "You should."

     "Hold it," interrupted Hugh. "We need a 'No Blushing' rule. Here we
are crowded worse than a Moscow apartment. Do you know the Japanese
saying about nakedness?"

     "I know they bathe in company," said Karen, "and I would be happy
to join them. Hot water! Oh, boy!"

     "They say, 'Nakedness is often seen but never looked at.' I'm not
urging you to parade around in skin. But we should quit being jumpy. If
you come in to change clothes and find that there is no privacy-why,
just change. Or take bathing in the stream. The person available to
guard might not be the sex of the person who wants the bath. So ignore
it." He looked at Joseph. "I mean you. I suspect you're sissy about it."

     Joe looked stubborn. "That's the way I was brought up, Hugh."

     "So? I wasn't brought up this way either, but I'm trying to make
the best of it. After a sweaty day's work it might be that Barbara is
the one available to stand bear watch for you."

     "I'll take my chances. I didn't see any bears."

     "Joe, I don't want any nonsense. You're my deputy."

     "I didn't ask to be."

     "Nor will you be, if you don't change your tune. You'll bathe when
you need it and you'll accept guard service from anybody."

     Joe looked stubborn. "No, thank you."

     Hugh Farnham sighed. "I didn't expect dam foolishness from you,
Joe. Duke, will you back me? 'Condition seven,' I mean."

     "Deelighted!" Duke grabbed the rifle he had carried earlier,
started to load it. Joe's chin dropped but he did not move.

     "Hold it, Duke. Guns won't be necessary. That's all, Joe. Just the
clothes you were wearing last night. Not clothes we stored for you, I
paid for those. Nothing else, not even matches. You can change in the
tank room; it was your modesty you insisted on saving. But your life is
your problem. Get moving."

     Joseph said slowly, "Mr. Farnham, do you really mean that?"

     "Were those real bullets in that gun you aimed at Duke? You helped
me clamp down on him; you heard me clamp down on my wife. Can I pull on
them anything that rough- and let you get away with it? Good God, I'd
get it from the girls next. Then the group would fall apart and die. I'd
rather it was just you. You have two minutes to say good-bye to Dr.
Livingstone. But leave the cat here; I don't want it eaten."

     Dr. Livingstone was in the Negro's lap. Joe got slowly to his feet,
still holding it. He seemed dazed.

     Hugh added, "Unless you prefer to stay."

     "I can?"

     "On the same terms as the rest."

     Two tears rolled down Joe's cheeks. He looked down at the cat and
stroked it, then answered in a low voice, "I would like to stay. I agree."

     "Good. Confirm it by apologizing to Barbara."

     Barbara looked startled. She appeared to be about to speak, then to
think better of it.

     "Uh. . . Barbara. I'm sorry."

     "It's all right, Joe."

     "I'd be. . . happy and proud to have you guard me. While I take a
bath, I mean. If you will."

     "Any time, Joe. Glad to."

     "Thank you."

     "And now," said Hugh, "who's for bridge? Karen?"

     "Why not?"

     "Duke?"

     "Bed for me. Anybody wants the pot, step over me."

     "Sleep on the floor by the bunks, Duke, and avoid the traffic. No,
take the upper bunk."

     "You take it."

     "I'll be last to bed, I want to look up a subject. Joe? Contract?"

     "I don't believe, sir, that I wish to play cards."

     "Putting me in my place, eh?"

     "I didn't say that, sir."

     "You didn't have to. Joe, I was offering an olive branch. One
rubber, only. We've had a hard day."

     "Thank you. I'd rather not."

     "Damn it, Joe, we can't afford to be sulky. Last night Duke had a
much rougher time. He was about to be shoved out into a radioactive
hell-not just to frolic with some fun-loving bears. Did he sulk?"

     Joe dropped his eyes, scratched Dr. Livingstone's skull- suddenly
looked up and grinned. "One rubber. And I'm going to beat you hollow!"

     "In a pig's eye. Barbie? Make a fourth?"

     "Delighted!"

     The cut paired Joe with Karen and gave him the deal. He riffled the
cards. "Now to stack a Mississippi Heart Hand!"

     "Watch him, Barbie."

     "Want a side bet, Daddy?"

     "What have you to offer?"

     "Well- My fair young body?"

     "Flabby."

     "Why, you utterly utter! I'm not flabby, I'm just deliciously
padded. Well, how about my life, my fortune, and my sacred honor?"

     "Against what?"

     "A diamond bracelet?"

     Barbara was surprised to see how badly Hugh played, miscounting and
even revoking. She realized that he was groggy with fatigue-why, the
poor darling! Somebody was going to have to clamp down on him, too. Or
he would kill himself trying to carry the whole load.

     Forty minutes later Hugh wrote an I.O.U. for one diamond bracelet,
then they got ready for bed. Hugh was pleased to see that Joe undressed
completely and got into the lower bunk, as he had been told to. Duke
stretched out on the floor, bare. The room was hot; the mass cooled
slowly and air no longer circulated with the manhole cover in place,
despite the vents in the tank room. Hugh made a note that he must devise
a bear proof-and cat proof-grille in place of the cover. Later, later-
He took the camp lamp into the tank room.

     Someone had put the books back on shelves but some were open to
dry; he fluffed these, hoped for the best. The last books in the world-
so it seemed.

     He felt sudden grief that abstract knowledge of deaths of millions
had not given him. Somehow, the burning of millions of books felt more
brutally obscene than the killing of people. All men must die, it was
their single common heritage. But a book need never die and should not
be killed; books were the immortal part of man. Book burners-to rape a
defenseless friendly book.

     Books had always been his best friends. In a hundred public
libraries they had taught him. From a thousand newsstands they had
warmed his loneliness. He suddenly felt that if he had not been able to
save some books, it would hardly be worthwhile to live.

     Most of his collection was functional: The Encyclopaedia
Britannica-Grace had thought the space should be used for a television
receiver "because they might be hard to buy afterwards." He had grudged
its bulkiness, too, but it was the most compact assemblage of knowledge
on the market. "Che" Guevera's War of the Guerillas-thank God he wasn't
going to need that! Nor those next to it: "Yank" Leivy's manual on
resistance fighting, Griffith's Translation of Mao Tse-tung's On
Guerilla Warfare, Tom Wintringham's New Ways of War, the new TR on
special operations-forget 'em! Ain't a-gonna study war no more!

     The Boy Scout Handbook, Eshbach's Mechanical Engineering, The Radio
Repairman's Guide, Outdoor Life's Hunting and Fishing, Edible Fungi and
How to Know Them, Home Life in the Colonial Days, Your Log Cabin,
Chimneys and Fireplaces, The Hobo's Cook Book, Medicine Without a
Doctor, Five Acres and Independence, Russian Self-Taught and
English-Russian and Russian-English dictionaries, The Complete
Herbalist, the survival manuals of the Navy Bureau of Weapons, The Air
Force's Survival Techniques, The Practical Carpenter-all sound books, of
the brown and useful sort. The Oxford Book of English Verse, A Treasury
of American Poetry, Hoyle's Book of Games, Burton's Anatomy of
Melancholy, a different Burton's Thousand Nights and a Night, the good
old Odyssey with the Wyeth illustrations, Kipling's Collected Verse, and
his Just So Stories, a one-volume Shakespeare, the Book of Common
Prayer, the Bible, Mathematical Recreations and Essays, Thus Spake
Zarathustra, T. S. Eliot's The Old Possum's Book of Practical Cats,
Robert Frost's Verse, Men Against the Sea- He wished that he had found
time to stock the list of fiction he had started. He wished that he had
fetched down his works of Mark Twain regardless of space. He wished- Too
late, too late. This was it. All that was left of a mighty civilization.
"The cloud-capped towers-"

     He jerked awake and found that he had fallen asleep standing up.
Why had he come in here? Something important. Oh, yes! Tanning leather-
Leather? Barbara was barefooted, Barbara must have moccasins. Better try
the Britannica. Or that Colonial Days volume.

     No, thank God, you didn't have to use salt! Find some oak trees.
Better yet, have Barbara find them; it would make her feel useful. Find
something that only Joe could do, too; make the poor little bastard feel
appreciated. Loved. Remember to- He stumbled back into the main room,
looked at the upper bunk and knew that he couldn't make it. He lay down
on the blanket they had played cards on and fell instantly asleep.

 

 

 

Chapter 5

 

 

     Grace did not get up for breakfast. The girls quietly fed them,
then stayed in to clean up. Duke went hunting, carrying a forty-five and
a hunting bow. It was his choice; arrows could be recovered or replaced,
bullets were gone forever. Duke tried a few flights and decided that his
shoulder was okay.

     He checked watches and set out, with an understanding that a smoky
fire would be built to home on if he was not back by three.

     Hugh told the girls to take outdoors any book not bone-dry, then
broke out pick and shovel and started leveling their house. Joe tried to
join him; Hugh vetoed it.

     "Look, Joe, there are a thousand things to do. Do them. But no
heavy work."

     "Such as what, Hugh?"

     "Uh, correct the inventories. Give Duke a hand by starring
everything that can't be replaced. In the course of that you'll think of
things; write them down. Look up how to make soap and candles. Check
both dosimeters. Strap on a gun and keep your eyes open-and see that
those girls don't go outside without guns. Hell, figure out a way to get
plumbing and running water, with no pipe and no lead and no water
closets and no Portland cement."

     "How in the world could you do that?"

     "Somebody did it the first time. And tell this bushy-tailed
sidewalk superintendent that I need no help."

     "Okay. Come here, Doc! Come, come, come!"

     "And Joe. Speaking of bathrooms, you might offer to stand guard for
the girls while they bathe. You don't have to look."

     "All right, I'll offer. But I'll tell them you suggested it. I
don't want them to think-"

     "Look, Joe. They are a couple of clean, wholesome, evil-minded
American girls. Say what you please, they will still believe you are
sneaking a peek. It's part of their credo that they are so fatally
irresistible that a man just has to. So don't be too convincing; you'll
hurt their feelings."

     "I get it. I guess." Joe went away, Hugh started digging, while
reflecting that he had never missed a chance, given opportunity without
loss of face-but that incorrigible Sunday school lad probably would not
sneak a peek at Lady Godiva. A good lad-no imagination but utterly
dependable. Shame to have been so rough on him last night- Very quickly
Hugh knew what his worst oversight had been: no wheelbarrow.

     He had dug only a little before reaching this new appreciation.
Digging by muscle power was bad but carrying it away in buckets was an
affront to good sense. So he carried and thought about how to build a
wheel- with no metal, no heating tools, no machine shop, no foundry, no-
Now wait! He had steel bottles. There was strap iron in the bunks and
soft iron in the periscope housing. Charcoal he could make and a bellows
was simply an animal skin and some branches. Whittle a nozzle. Any
damfool who couldn't own a wheel with all that at his disposal deserved
to lift and carry.

     He had ten thousand trees, didn't he? Finland didn't have a damn
thing but trees. Yet Finland was the finest little country in the world.

     "Doc, get out from under my feet!" If Finland was still there-
Wherever the world was- Maybe the girls would like a Finnish bath. Down
where they could plunge in afterwards and squeal and feel good. Poor
kids, they would never see a beauty parlor; maybe a sauna would be a
"moral equivalent." Grace might like it. Sweat off that blubber, get her
slender again. What a beauty she had been!

     Barbara showed up, with a shovel. "Where did you get that? And what
do you think you're going to do?"

     "It's the one Duke was using. I'm going to dig."

     "In bare feet? You're era- Hey, you're wearing shoes!"

     "Joe's. The jeans are his, too. The shirt is Karen's. Where shall I
dig?"

     "Just beyond me, here. Any boulder over five hundred pounds, ask
for help. Where's Karen?"

     "Bathing. I decided to stink worse and bathe later."

     "When you like. Don't try to stick on this job all day. You can't."

     "I like working with you, Hugh. Almost as much as-" She let it hang.

     "As playing bridge?"

     "As playing bridge as your partner. Yes, you could mention that. Too."

     "Barbie girl."     -

     He found that just digging was fun. Gave the mind a rest and the
muscles a workout. Happy making. Hadn't tried it for much too long.

 

     Barbara had been digging an hour when Mrs. Farnham came around a
corner. Barbara said, "Good morning," added a shovelful to a bucket,
picked both up half filled, and disappeared around the other corner.

     Grace Farnham said, "Well! I wondered where you were hiding. I was
left quite alone. Do you realize that?" She was in the clothes she had
slept in. Her features looked puffy.

     "You were allowed to sleep, dear."

     "It isn't pleasant to wake up in a strange place alone. I'm not
accustomed to it."

     "Grace, you weren't being slighted. You were being pampered."

     "Is that what you call it? Then we'll say no more about it, do you
mind?"

     "Not at all."

     "Really?" She seemed to brace herself, then said bleakly, "Perhaps
you can stop long enough to tell me where you have hidden my liquor. My
liquor. My share. I wouldn't think of touching yours-after the way
you've treated me! In front of servants and strangers, may I add?"

     "Grace, you must see Duke."

     "What do you mean?"

     "Duke is in charge of liquor. I don't know where he put it."

     "You're lying!"

     "Grace, I haven't lied to you in twenty-seven years."

     "Oh! You brutal, brutal man!"

     "Perhaps. But I'm not lying and the next time you say I am, it will
go hard with you."

     "Where's Duke? He won't let you talk to me that way! He told me so,
he promised me!"

     "Duke has gone hunting. He hopes to be back by three."

     She stared, then rushed back around the corner. Barbara reappeared,
picked up her shovel. They went on working.

     Hugh said, "I'm sorry you were exposed to that."

     "To what?"

     "Unless you were at least a hundred yards away, you know what."

     "Hugh, it's none of my business."

     "Under these conditions, anything is everybody's business. You have
formed a bad opinion of Grace."

     "Hugh, I would not dream of being critical of your wife."

     "You have opinions. But I want you to have one in depth. Visualize
her as she was, oh, twenty-five years ago. Think of Karen."

     "She would have looked like Karen."

     "Yes. But Karen has never had responsibility. Grace had and took it
well. I was an enlisted man; I wasn't commissioned until after Pearl
Harbor. Her people were what is known as 'good family.' Not anxious to
have their daughter marry a penniless enlisted man."

     "I suppose not."

     "Nevertheless, she did. Barbara, have you any notion what it was to
be the wife of a junior enlisted man in those days? With no money?
Grace's parents wanted her to come home- but would not send her a cent
as long as she stuck with me. She stuck."

     "Good for Grace."

     "Yes. She had no preparation for living in one room and sharing a
bath down the hail, nor for waiting in Navy outpatient clinics. For
making a dollar go twice as far as it should. For staying alone while I
was at sea. Young and pretty and in Norfolk, she could have found
excitement. She found a job instead-in a laundry, sorting dirty clothes.
And whenever I was home she was bright and cheerful and uncomplaining.

     "Alexander was born the next year-"

     "'Alexander'?"

     "Duke. Named for his maternal grandpappy; I didn't get a vote. Her
parents were anxious to make up once they had a grandson; they were even
willing to accept me. Grace stayed cool and never accepted a cent-back
to work with our landlady minding the baby in weeks.

     "Those years were the roughest. I went up fast and money wasn't
such a problem. The War came and I was bucked from chief to j.g. and
ended as a lieutenant commander in Seabees. In 1946 I had to choose
between going back to chief or becoming a civilian. With Grace's
backing, I got out. So I was on the beach with no job, a wife, a son in
grammar school, a three-year-old daughter, living in a trailer, prices
high and going higher. We had some war bonds.

     "That was the second rough period. I took a stab at contracting,
lost our savings, went to work for a water company. We didn't starve,
but scraped icebox and dishrag soup were on the menu. Barbara, she stood
it like a trouper-a hardworking den mother, a pillar of the PTA, and
always cheerful.

     "I was a construction boss before long and presently I tried
contracting again. This time it clicked. I built a house on spec and a
shoestring, sold it before it was finished and built two more at once.
We've never been broke since."

     Hugh Farnham looked puzzled. "That was when she started to slip.
When she started having help. When we kept liquor in the house. We
didn't quarrel-we never did save over the fact that I tried to raise
Duke fairly strictly and Grace couldn't bear to have the boy touched.

     "But that was when it started, when I started making money. She
isn't built to stand prosperity. Grace has always stood up to adversity
magnificently. This is the first time she hasn't. I still think she will."

     "Of course she will, Hugh."

     "I hope so."

     "I'm glad to know more about her, Hugh. I'll try to be considerate."

     "Damn it, I'm not asking that. I just want you to know that fat and
foolish and self-centered isn't all there is to Grace. Nor was her
slipping entirely her fault. I'm not easy to live with, Barbara."

     "So?"

     "So! When we were able to slow down, I didn't. I let business keep
me away evenings. When a woman is left alone, it's easy to slip out for
another beer when the commercial comes on and to nibble all evening
along with the beer. If I was home, I was more likely to read than to
visit, anyhow. And I didn't just let business keep me away; I joined the
local duplicate club. She joined but she dropped out. She plays a good
social game-but I like to fight for every point. No criticism of her,
there's no virtue in playing as if it were life or death. Grace's way is
better- Had I been willing to take it easy, too, well, she wouldn't be
the way she is."

     "Nonsense!"

     "Pardon me?"

     "Hugh Farnham, what a person is can never be somebody else's fault,
I think. I am what I am because Barbie herself did it. And so did Grace.
And so did you." She added in a low voice, "I love you. And that's not
your fault, nor is anything we did your fault. I won't listen to you
beating your breast and sobbing 'Mea culpa!' You don't take credit for
Grace's virtues. Why take blame for her faults?"

     He blinked and smiled. "Seven no trump."

     "That's better."

     "I love you. Consider yourself kissed."

     "Kiss back. Grand slam. But watch it," she said out of the corner
of her mouth. "Here come the cops."

     It was Karen, clean, shining, hair brushed, fresh lipstick, and
smiling. "What an inspiring sight!" she said. "Would you poor slaves
like a crust of bread and a pannikin of water?"

     "Shortly," her father agreed. "In the meantime don't carry these
buckets too heavily loaded."

     Karen backed away. "I wasn't volunteering!"

     "That's all right. We aren't formal."

     "But Daddy, I'm clean!"

     "Has the creek gone dry?"

     "Daddy! I've got lunch ready. Out front. You're too filthy to come
into my lovely clean house." -

     "Yes, baby. Come along, Barbara." He picked up the buckets.

 

     Mrs. Farnham did not appear for lunch. Karen stated that Mother had
decided to eat inside. Hugh let it go at that; there would be enough
hell when Duke got back.

     Joe said, "Hugh? About that notion of plumbing-"

     "Got it figured out?"

     "Maybe I see a way to have running water."

     "If we get running water, I guarantee to provide plumbing fixtures."

     "Really, Daddy? I know what I want. In colored tile. Lavender, I
think. And with a dressing table built around-"

     "Shut up, infant. Yes, Joe?"

     "Well, you know those Roman aqueducts. This stream runs uphill that
way. I mean it's higher up that way, so someplace it's higher than the
shelter. As I understand it, Roman aqueducts weren't pipe, they were open."

     "I see." Farnham considered it. There was a waterfall a hundred
yards upstream. Perhaps above it was high enough.

     "But that would mean a lot of masonry, whether dry-stone, or mud
mortar. And each arch requires a frame while it's being built."

     "Couldn't we just split logs and hollow them out? And support them
on other logs?"

     "We could." Hugh thought about it. "There's an easier way, and one
that would kill two birds. Barbara, what sort of country is this?"

     "I beg your pardon?"

     "You said that this area is at least semitropical. Can you tell
what season it is? And what the rest of the year is likely to bring?
What I'm driving at is this: Are you going to need irrigation?"

     "Good heavens, Hugh, I can't answer that!"

     "You can try."

     "Well-" She looked around. "I doubt if it ever freezes here. If we
had water, we might have crops all year. This is not a tropical rain
forest, or the undergrowth would be much more dense. It looks like a
place with a rainy season and a dry season."

     "Our creek doesn't go dry; it has lots of fish. Where were you
thinking of having your garden?"

     "How about this stretch downstream to the south? Several trees
should come out, though, and a lot of bushes."

     "Trees and bushes are no problem. Mmm- Joe, let's take a walk. I'll
carry a rifle, you strap on your forty-five. Girls, don't dig so much
that it topples down on you. We would miss you."

     "Daddy, I was thinking of taking a nap."

     "Good. Think about it while you're digging."

     Hugh and Joe worked their way upstream. "What are you figuring on,
Hugh?"

     "A contour-line ditch. We need to lead water to an air vent on the
roof. If we can do that, we've got it made. A sanitary toilet. Running
water for cooking and washing. And for gardening, coming in high enough
to channel it wherever Barbara wants it. But the luxury that will mean
most to our womenfolk is a bath and kitchen. We'll clear the tank room
and install both."

     "Hugh, I see how you might get water with a ditch. But what about
fixtures? You can't just let water splash down through the roof."

     "I don't know yet, but we'll build them. Not a flush toilet, it's
too complex. But a constant-flow toilet, a sort that used to be common
aboard warships. It's a trough with seats. Water runs in one end, out
the other. We'll lead it down the manhole, out the tunnel, and away from
the house. Have you seen any clay?"

     "There is a clay bank at the stream below the house. Karen
complained about how sticky it was. She went upstream to bathe, a sandy
spot." -

     "I'll look at it. If we can bake clay, we can make all sorts of
things. A toilet. A sink. Dishes. Tile pipe. Build a kiln out of unbaked
clay, use the kiln to bake anything. But clay just makes it easier.
Water is the real gold; all civilizations were built on water. Joe, we
are about high enough."

     "Maybe a little higher? It would be embarrassing to dig a ditch a
couple of hundred yards long-"

     "Longer."

     "-or longer, and find that it's too low and no way to get it up to
the roof."

     "Oh, we'll survey it first."

     "Survey it? Hugh, maybe you didn't notice but we don't even have a
spirit level. That big smash broke its glasses. And there isn't even a
tripod, much less a transit and all those things."

     "The Egyptians invented surveying with less, Joe. Losing the spirit
level doesn't matter. We'll build an unsplit level."

     "Are you making fun of me, Hugh?"

     "Not at all. Mechanics were building level and square centuries
before you could buy instruments. We'll build a plumbbob level. That's
an upside-down T, and a string with a weight to mark the vertical. You
can build it about six feet long and six high to give us a long sighting
arm-minimize the errors. Have to take apart one of the bunks for boards.
It's light, fussy work you can do while your ribs heal. ~While the girls
do the heavy, unfussy excavating."

     "You draw it, I'll build it."

     "When we get the building leveled we'll mount it on the roof and
sight upstream. Have to cut a tree or two but we won't have any trouble
running a base line. Intercepts we run with a smaller level. Duck soup,
Joe."

     "No sweat, huh?"

     "Mostly sweat. But twenty feet a day of shallow ditch and we'll
have irrigation water when the dry season hits. The bathroom can
wait-the gals will be cheered just by the fact that there will be one,
someday. Joe, it would suit me if our base line cuts the stream about
here. See anything?"

     "What should I see?"

     "We fell those two trees and they dam the creek. Then chuck in
branches, mud, and some brush and still more mud and rocks and the
stream backs up in a pond." Hugh added, "Have to devise a gate, and that
I do not see, with what we have to work with. Every problem leads
straight to another. Damn."

     "Hugh, you're counting your chickens before the cows come home."

     "I suppose so. Well, let's go see how much the girls have dug while
we loafed."

     The girls had dug little; Duke had returned with a miniature
four-point buck. Barbara and Karen had it strung up against a tree and
were trying to butcher it. Karen seemed to have as much blood on her as
there was on the ground.

     They stopped as the men approached. Barbara wiped her forehead,
leaving a red trail. "I hadn't realized they were so complicated inside."

     "Or so messy!" sighed Karen.

     "With that size it's easier on the ground."

     "Now he tells us. Show us, Daddy. We'll watch."

     "Me? I'm a gentleman sportsman; the guide did the dirty work. But-
Joe, can you lay hands on that little hatchet?"

     "Sure. It's sharp; I touched it up yesterday."

     Hugh split the breastbone and pelvic girdle and spread the carcass,
then peeled out viscera and lungs and spilled them, while silently
congratulating the girls on not having pierced the intestines. "All
yours, girls. Barbara, if you can get that hide off, you might be
wearing it soon. Have you noticed any oaks?"

     "There are scrub forms. And sumach, too. You're thinking of tannin?"

     "Yes."

     "I know how to extract it."

     "Then you know more about tanning than I do. I'll bow out. There
are books."

     "I know, I was looking it up. Doe! Don't sniff at that, boy."

     "He won't eat it," Joe assured her, "unless it's good for him. Cats
are fussy."

     While butchering was going on, Duke and his mother crawled out and
joined them. Mrs. Farnham seemed cheerful but did not greet anyone; she
simply looked at Duke's kill. "Oh, the poor little thing! Duke dear, how
did you have the heart to kill it?"

     "It sassed me and I got mad."

     "It's a pretty piece of venison, Duke," Hugh said. "Good eating."

     His wife glanced at him. "Perhaps you'll eat it; I couldn't bear to."

     Karen said, "Have you turned vegetarian, Mother?"

     "It's not the same thing. I'm going in, I don't want that on me.
Karen, don't you dare come inside until you've washed; I won't have you
tracking blood in after I've slaved away getting the place spotless."
She headed toward the shelter. "Come inside, Duke."

     "In a moment, Mother."

     Karen gave the carcass an unnecessarily vicious cut.

     "Where did you nail it?" Hugh asked.

     "Other side of the ridge. I should have been back sooner."

     "Why?"

     "Missed an easy shot and splintered an arrow on a boulder. Buck
fever. It has been years since I used a-'bow season' license."

     "One lost arrow, one carcass, is good hunting. You saved the
arrowhead?"

     "Of course. Do I look foolish?"

     Karen answered, "No, but I do. Buddy, I cleaned house. If Mother
did any cleaning, it was a mess she made herself."

     "I realized that."

     "And I'll bet when she smells these steaks, she won't want Spam!"

     "Forget it."

     Hugh moved away, signaling Duke to follow.

     "I'm glad to see Grace looking cheerful. You must have soothed her."

     Duke looked sheepish. "Well- As you pointed out, it's rough,
chopping it off completely." He added, "But I rationed her. I gave her
one drink and told her she could have one more before dinner."

     "That's doing quite well."

     "I had better go inside. The bottle is there."

     "Perhaps you had."

     "Oh, it's all right. I put her on her honor. You don't know how to
handle her, Dad."

     "That's true. I don't."

 

 

 

Chapter 6

 

 

 

 From the Journal of Barbara Wells:

 

I am hobbled by a twisted ankle, so I am lying down and adding to this.
I've taken notes every night-but in shorthand. I haven't transcribed
very much.

     The longhand version goes in the fly leaves of the Britannica.
There are ten blank pages in each volume, twenty-four volumes, and I'll
squeeze a thousand words to a page- 240,000 words-enough to record our
doings until we reclaim the art of making paper-especially as the
longhand version will be censored.

     Because I can't let my hair down to anyone-and sometimes a gal
needs to! This shorthand record is a diary which no one can read but me,
as Karen is as poor at Gregg as she claimed.

     Or perhaps Joe knows Gregg. Isn't it required in business colleges?
But Joe is a gentleman and would not read this without invitation. I am
fond of Joseph; his goodness is not a sham. I am sure he is keeping his
lip buttoned on many unhappy thoughts; his position is as anomalous as
mine and more difficult.

     Grace has quit ordering him around-save that she orders all of us.
Hugh gives orders, but for the welfare of all. Nor does he give many; we
are settled in a routine. I'm the farmer, and plan my own work; Duke
keeps meat on the table and gives me a hand when he doesn't hunt; Hugh
hasn't told either of us what to do for a long time, and Karen has a
free hand with the house. Hugh has about two centuries of mechanical
work planned out and Joe helps him.

     But Grace's orders are for her own comfort. We usually carry them
out; it's easier. She gets her own way and more than her share, simply
by being difficult.

     She got the lion's share of liquor. Liquor doesn't matter to me; I
rarely "need" a drink. But I enjoy a glow in company and had to remind
myself that it was not my liquor, it was Farnham liquor.

     Grace finished her share in three days. Duke's was next to go. And
so on. At last all was gone save one quart of bourbon earmarked
"medicinal." Grace spotted where Duke had it and dug it up. When Duke
came home, she was passed out and the bottle was dead.

     The next three days were horrors. She screamed. She wept. She
threatened suicide. Hugh and Duke teamed up and one of them was always
with her. Hugh acquired a black eye, Duke got scratches down his
handsome face. I understand they put a lot of B1 into her and force-fed her.

     On the fourth day she stayed in her bunk; the next day she got up
and seemed almost normal.

     But during lunch she asserted, as something "everybody knows," that
the Russians had attacked because Hugh insisted on building a shelter.

     She didn't seem angry-more forgiving. She went on to the happy
thought that the war would soon be over and we could all go home.

     Nobody argued. What good? Her delusion seems harmless. She has
assumed her job, at last, as chief cook-but if she is a better cook than
Karen I have yet to see it. Mostly she talks about dishes she could
prepare if only she had this, or that. Karen works as hard as ever and
sometimes gets so mad that she comes out to cry on me and then hoes
furiously.

     Duke tells Karen that she must be patient.

     I should not criticize Duke; he is probably going to be my husband.
I mean, who else is there? I could stand Duke but I'm not sure I could
stand Grace as a mother-in-law. Duke is handsome and is considerate of
both me and his sister. He did quarrel with his father at first
(foolishly it seemed to me) but they get along perfectly now.

     In this vicinity he is quite a catch.

     Myself? I'm not soured on marriage even though I struck out once.
Hugh assumes that the human race will go on. I'm willing.

     (Polygamy? Of course I would! Even with Grace as senior wife. But I
haven't been asked. Nor, I feel sure, would Grace permit it. Hugh and I
don't discuss such things, we avoid touching the other, we avoid being
alone together, and I do not make cow's eyes at him. Finished.)

     The trouble is, while I like Duke, no spark jumps. So I am putting
it off and avoiding circumstances where he might pat me on the fanny. It
would be a hell of a note if I married him and there came a night when I
was so irritated at his mother and so vexed with him for indulging her
that I would tell him coldly that he is not half the man his father is.

     No, that must not happen. Duke does not deserve it.

     Joe? My admiration for him is unqualified-and he doesn't have a
mother problem.

     Joe is the first Negro I've had a chance to know well-and I think
most well of him. He plays better contract than I do; I suppose he's
smarter than I am. He is fastidious and never comes indoors without
bathing. Oh, get downwind after he has spent a day digging and he's
pretty whiff. But so is Duke, and Hugh is worse. I don't believe this
story about a distinctive "nigger musk."

     Have you ever been in a dirty powder room? Women stink worse than men.

     The trouble with Joe is the same as with Duke: No spark jumps.
Since he is so shy that he is most unlikely to court me- Well, it won't
happen.

     But I am fond of him-as a younger brother. He is never too busy to
be accommodating. He is usually bear guard for Karen and me when we
bathe and it's a comfort to know that Joe is alert- Duke has killed five
bears and Joe killed one while he was actually guarding us. It took
three shots and dropped dead almost in Joe's lap. He stood his ground.

     We adjourned without worrying about modesty, which upset Joe more
than bears do.

     Or wolves, or coyotes, or mountain lions, or a cat which Duke says
is a mutated leopard and especially dangerous because it attacks by
dropping out of a tree. We don't bathe under trees and don't venture out
of our clearing without an armed man. It is as dangerous as crossing
Wilshire against the lights.

     There are snakes, too. At least one sort is poisonous.

     Joe and Hugh were starting one morning on the house leveling and
Joe jumped down into the excavation. Dr.-Livingstone-I-Presume jumped
down with him-and here was this snake.

     Doc spotted it and hissed; Joe saw it just as it struck, getting
him in the calf. Joe killed it with his shovel and dropped to the
ground, grabbing at his leg.

     Hugh had the wound slashed and was sucking it in split seconds. He
had a tourniquet on quickly and permanganate crystals on the wound soon
after as I heard the hooraw and came a-runnin'. He followed that with
rattlesnake anti-venom.

     Moving Joe was a problem; he collapsed in the tunnel. Hugh crawled
over him and pulled, I pushed, and it took three of us-Karen, too-to
lift him up the ladder. We undressed him and put him to bed.

     Around midnight, when his respiration was low and his pulse
uncertain, Hugh moved the remaining bottle of oxygen into the room, put
over Joe's head a plastic sack in which shirts had been stored and gave
him oxygen.

     By morning he was better.

     In three days he was up and well. Duke says it was a pit viper,
perhaps a bushmaster, and that a rattlesnake is a pit viper, too, so
rattlesnake anti-venom probably saved Joe's life.

     I am not trusting any snakes.

 

     It took three weeks to excavate under the house. Boulders! This
area is a wide, flat, saucer-shaped valley, with boulders most anywhere.
Whenever we hit a big one, we dug around it and the men would worry it
out with crowbar and block and tackle.

     Mostly the men could get boulders out. But Karen found one that
seemed to go down to China. Hugh looked it over and said, "Fine. Now dig
a hole just north of it and deeper."

     Karen just looked at him.

     So we dug. And hit another big boulder. "Good," said Hugh. "Dig
another hole north of that one."

     We hit a third oversize boulder. But in three days the last one had
been tumbled into a hole next to it, the middle one had been worried
into a hole where the last one had been, and the one that started the
trouble was buried where the middle one had been.

     As fast as any spot had been cut deeply enough Hugh propped it up
with pieces of log; he was worried lest the shelter shift and crush
someone. So when we finished the shelter had a forest of posts under it.

     Hugh then set two very heavy posts under the uphill corners and
started removing the inner ones, using block and tackle. Sometimes they
had to be dug under. Hugh was nervous during this and did all the
rigging and digging himself.

     At last the uphill half was supported on these two big chunks.

     They would not budge.

     There was so much weight on those timbers that they sneered at our
efforts. I said, "What do we do now, Hugh?"

     "Try the next-to-last resort."

     "What's the last resort?"

     "Burn them. But it would take roaring fires and we would have to
clear grass and bushes and trees for quite a distance. Karen, you know
where the ammonia is. And the iodine. I want both."

     I had wondered why Hugh had stocked so much ammonia. But he had, in
used plastic Chlorox bottles; the stuff had ridden through the shocks. I
hadn't known that iodine was stocked in quantity, too; I don't handle
the drugs.

     Soon he had sort of a chemistry lab. "What are you making, Hugh?" I
asked.

     "Ersatz 'dynamite.' And I don't need company," he said. "The stuff
is so touchy it explodes at a harsh look."

     "Sorry," I said, backing away.

     He looked up and smiled. "It's safe until it dries. I had it in
mind in case I ever found myself in an underground. Occupying troops
take a sour view of natives having explosives, but there is nothing
suspicious about ammonia or iodine. The stuff is safe until you put it
together and does not require a primer. But I never expected to use it
for construction; it's too treacherous."

     "Hugh, I just remembered I don't care whether a floor is level or not."

     "If it makes you nervous, take a walk."

     Making it was simple; he combined tincture of iodine and ordinary
household ammonia; a precipitate settled out. This he filtered through
Kleenex, the result was a paste.

     Joe drilled holes into those stubborn posts; Hugh wrapped this mess
in two batches, in paper, and packed a bundle into each hole, tamping
with his finger. "Now we wait for it to dry."

     Everything that he used he flushed down with water, then took a
bath with his clothes on, removed them in the water and left them,
weighted down with rocks. That was all that day.

     Our armament includes two lovely ladies' guns, .22 magnum rimfires
with telescopic sights. Hugh had Duke and Joe sight them in. The
sighting-in was done with sandbag rest- heaped-up dirt, that is. Hugh
had them expend five bullets each, so I knew he was serious. "One
bullet, one bear" is his motto.

     When the explosive was dry, everything breakable was removed from
the shelter. We women were chased far back, Karen was charged with
hanging on to Dr. Livingstone, and I was armed with Duke's bear rifle,
just in case.

     Duke and Joe were on their bellies a measured hundred feet from the
posts. Hugh stood between them. "Ready for count?"

     "Ready, Hugh."-"Ready, Dad."

     "Deep breath. Let part of it out. Hold it, steady on target, take
up the slack. Five. . . four. . . three . . . two. . . one fire!"

     A sound like a giant slammed door and the middle of each post
disintegrated. The shelter stuck out like a shelf, then tilted
ponderously down, touched, and was level.

     Karen and I cheered; Grace started to clap; Dr. Livingstone jumped
down to investigate. Hugh turned his head and grinned.

     And the shelter tilted back the other way as the ridge crumbled; it
started to slide. It pivoted on the tunnel protuberance, picked up speed
and tobogganed down the slope. I thought it was going to end up in the
creek.

     But the slope leveled off; it ground to a stop, with the tunnel
choked with dirt and the whole thing farther out of plumb than before!

     Hugh picked up the shovel he had used to heap up shooting supports,
walked down to the shelter, began to dig.

     I ran down, tears bursting from my eyes. Joe was there first. Hugh
looked up and said, "Joe, dig out the tunnel. I want to know if anything
is damaged and the girls will want to get lunch."

     "Boss-" Joe choked out. "Boss! Oh, gosh!"

     Hugh said, in a tone you use to a child, "Why are you upset, Joe?
This has saved us work."

     I thought he had flipped. Joe said, "Huh?"

     "Certainly," Hugh assured him. "See how much lower the roof is?
Every foot it dropped saves at least a hundred feet of aqueduct. And
leveling will be simple here; the ground is loam and boulders are few. A
week, with everybody pitching in. Then we bring water to the house and
garden two weeks early."

     He was correct. The shelter was level in a week, and this time he
triggered the end posts with crosspieces; blasting was not needed. Best
of all, the armor door cranked back without a murmur and we had air and
sunlight inside- It had been stuffy and candles made it pretty rank. Joe
and Hugh started the ditch the same day. In anticipation of the glorious
day, Karen sketched on the walls of the tank room life-size pictures of
a washstand, a bathtub, a pot.

     Truthfully, we are comfortable. Two mattress covers Karen filled
with dried grass; sleeping on the floor is no worse than the bunks. We
sit in chairs and play our evening rubber at the table. It is amazing
what a difference level floors make and how much better it is to have a
door than to climb down a ladder and crawl out a hole.

     We had to cook over a campfire a while as our grill and Dutch oven
were smashed. Karen and I have thrown together a make-do because, as
soon as water is led to the house, Hugh intends to start on ceramics,
not only for a toilet and a sink but also for a stove vented out through
the periscope hole. Luxury!

     My corn is coming up beautifully. I wonder what I can use to grind
corn? The thought of hot corn bread buttered with deer grease makes me
drool.

 

December 25th-Merry Christmas!

     We think it is. Hugh says we are not more than a day off.

     Shortly after we got here Hugh picked a small tree with a flat
boulder due north of it and sawed it off so that it placed a sharp
shadow on the boulder at noon. As "Keeper of the Flame" it has been my
duty to sit by that boulder from before apparent noon and note the
shortest shadow-follow it down, mark the shortest position and date it.

     That shadow had been growing longer and the days shorter. A week
ago it began to be hard to see any change and I told Hugh. So we watched
together and three days ago was the turning point . . . so that day
became December 22nd and we are celebrating Christmas instead of the
Fourth of July. But we got our flag up, as Hugh had planned, to the top
of the tallest tree in our clearing, with its branches lopped to make it
a pole. As Keeper of the Flame I am charged with raising and lowering it
but this was a special occasion; we drew lots and Joe won. We lined up
and sang "The Star Spangled Banner" while he hauled it to the peak-and
everyone was crying so hard he could hardly sing.

     Then we pledged allegiance. Maybe it is sentimental nonsense by
ragged castaways but I don't think so. We are still one nation, under
God, free and indivisible, with liberty and justice for all.

     Hugh held divine services and read the Christmas story from the
Gospel According to Luke and called on Karen to pray, then we sang
carols. Grace has a strong, sure lead; Joe is a bell-like tenor, and
Karen, myself, Hugh, and Duke are soprano, contralto, baritone, and
bass. I think we sound good. In any case we enjoyed it, even though
Grace got taken by the weeps during "White Christmas" and it was contagious.

     We would have had services anyhow as today would be Sunday by the
old calendar; Hugh holds them every Sunday. Everybody attends, even Duke
who is an avowed atheist. Hugh reads a Psalm or some other chapter; we
sing hymns; he prays or invites someone to pray, and ends it with "Bless
This House-" We are back to the days when the Old Man is priest.

     But Hugh never uses the Apostles' Creed and his prayers are so
nonsectarian that he does not even end them "In Jesus' Name, Amen."

     On a rare occasion when he and I spoke in private-waiting out a
noon sight last week-I asked him where he stood on matters of faith? (It
is important to me to know where my man stands even though he is not my
man and can't be.)

     "You could call me an Existentialist."

     "You are not a Christian?"

     "I didn't say that. I can't express it in the negative because it's
affirmative. I shan't define it; it would only add to the confusion. You
are wondering why I hold church since I refuse to assert a creed?"

     "Well. . . yes."

     "It's my duty. Services should be available to those who need them.
If there is no good and no God, this ritual is harmless. If God is, it
is appropriate-and still harmless. We are bleeding no peasants, offering
no bloody sacrifices, raising no vanities to the skies in the name of
religion. Or so I see it, Barbara."

     That had better hold me; it's all I'll get out of him. In my past
life religion was a nice, warm, comfy thing I did on Sundays; I can't
say it agonized me. But Hugh's God-less offering to God has become
important.

     Sundays are important other ways. Hugh discourages work other than
barbering and primping or hobby work, and encourages games, or any fun
thing. Chess, bridge, Scrabble, modeling in clay, group sings, such
like- Or just yakking. Games are important; they mark that we are not
just animals trying to stay alive but humans enjoying life and savoring
it. That nightly rubber of bridge we never skip. It proclaims that our
lives are not just hoeing and digging ditches and butchering.

     We keep up our bodies, too. I've become pretty good at cutting
hair. Duke grew a beard at first but Hugh shaved every day and presently
Duke did, too. I don't know what they will do when blades are no more.
I've noticed Joe honing a Gem blade on an oil stone.

     It's still Christmas and I'll cut back in when the rubber in
progress is finished. Dinner was lavish; Grace and Karen spent two days
on it-brook trout savory aux herbes, steamed freshwater prawns, steaks
and broiled mushrooms, smoked tongue, bouillon Ursine, crackers (quite a
treat), radishes, lettuce, green onions, baby beets a la Grace, and best
of all, a pan of fudge, as condensed milk, chocolate, and sugar are
irreplaceable. Nescafé and cigarettes, two cups and two cigarettes each.

     Presents for everybody- All I saved besides clothes I had on was my
purse. I was wearing nylons, took them off soon and haven't worn
stockings since; I gave them to Karen. I had a lipstick; Grace got that.
I had been plaiting a belt; Joe got that. In my purse was a fancy hanky;
I washed it, ironed it by pressing it against smooth concrete-Duke got that.

     It was this morning before I figured out anything for Hugh. For
years I've carried in my purse a little memo book. It has my maiden name
in gold and still has half of a filler. Hugh can use it-but it was my
name on it that decided me.

     I must run; Grace and I are due to attempt to clobber Hugh and Joe.

     I've never had a happier Christmas.

 

 

 

Chapter 7

 

 

 

      Karen and Barbara were washing themselves, the day's dishes, and
the week's laundry. Above them, Joe kept watch. Bushes and then trees
had been cut away around the stretch they used for bathing; a predator
could not approach without Joe having a clear shot at it. His eyes swung
constantly, checking approaches. He wasted no seconds on the Elysian
tableau he guarded.

     Karen said, "Barbie, this sheet won't stand another laundering.
It's rags."

     "We need rags."

     "But what will we use for sheets? It's this soap." Karen scooped a
handful from a bowl on the bank. It was soft and gray and harsh and
looked like oatmeal mush. "The stuff eats holes."

     "I'm not fretted about sheets but I dread the day when we are down
to our last towel."

     "Which will belong to Mother," Karen stated. "Our rationing officer
will have some excellent reason."

     "Nasty, nasty. Karen, Duke has done a wonderful job."

     "I wasn't bitching. Duke can't help it. It's his friend Eddie."

     "'Eddie?'"

     "Edipus Rex, dear."

     Barbara turned away and began rinsing a pair of ragged blue jeans.

     Karen said, "You dig me?"

     "We all have faults."

     "Sure, everybody but me. Even Daddy has a shortcoming. His neck
pains him."

     Barbara looked up. "Is Hugh having trouble with his neck? Perhaps
it would help if we massaged it."

     Karen giggled. "Your weakness, sister mine, is that you wouldn't
know a joke if it bit you. Daddy is still-necked and nothing will cure
it. He doesn't have weaknesses and that's his weakness. Don't frown. I
love Daddy. I admire him. But I'm glad I'm not like him. I'll take this
load up to the thorn bushes. Damn it, why didn't Daddy stock
clothespins? Those thorns are as bad as the soap."

     "Clothespins we can do without. Hugh did an incredible job.
Everything from an eight-day clock-"

     "Which got busted, right off."

     "-to tools and seeds and books and I don't know what. Karen! Don't
climb out naked!"

     Karen stopped, one foot on the bank. "Nonsense. Old Stone Face
won't look. Humiliating, that's what it is. I think I'll yoo-hoo at him."

     "You'll do no such thing. Joe is being a gentleman under trying
circumstances. Don't make it harder. Let that load wait and we'll take
it all up at once."

     "Okay, okay. I can't help wondering if he's human."

     "He is. I can vouch for it."

     "Hmm- Barbie, don't tell me Saint Joseph made a pass at you?"

     "Heavens, no! But he blushes if I squeeze past him in the house."

     "How can you tell?"

     "Sort of purple. Karen, Joe is sweet. I wish you had heard him
explain about Doc."

     "Explain what?"

     "Well, Doc is beginning to accept me. I was holding Doc yesterday
and noticed something and said, 'Joe, Doe is getting terribly fat. Or
was he always?'

     "That was a time when he blushed. But he answered with sweet
seriousness, 'Barbara, Dr. Livingstone isn't as much of a boy cat as he
thinks he is. Old Doe is more a girl-type cat. That isn't fat. Uh, you
see- Doe is going to have babies.' He blurted it out. Seemed to think it
would upset me. Didn't of course, but I was astonished."

     "Barbara, you mean you didn't know that Dr.-Livingstone-I-Presume
is a female?"

     "How would I know? Everybody calls him 'he' and he-she-has a male
name."

     "A doctor can be female. Can't you tell a tomcat?"

     "I never thought about it. Doe is pretty fuzzy."

     "Mmm, yes, with a Persian one might not be certain at first glance.
But a tomcat's badges of authority are prominent."

     "Had I noticed, I would have assumed that he had been altered."

     Karen looked shocked. "Don't let Daddy hear that! He never allows a
cat to be spayed or cut. Daddy thinks cats are citizens. However, you've
surprised me. Kittens, huh?"

     "So Joe says."

     "And I didn't notice." Karen looked puzzled. "Come to think of it,
I haven't picked him up lately. Just petted him and tried to keep him
out of things. Lately it hasn't been safe to open a drawer; he's into
it. Looking for a place to have kittens of course. I should have twigged."

     "Karen, why do you keep saying 'he' and 'him'?"

     "'Why?' Joe told you. Doe thinks he is a boy cat-and who am I to
argue? He's always thought so, he was the feistiest kitten we ever had.
11mm- Kittens. Barbie, the first time Doe came into heat we arranged for
Doe to meet a gentleman cat of exalted ancestry. But it wasn't Doe's
métier and he beat the hell out of the tomcat. So we quit trying. Mmm-
Calendar girl, how long have we been here?"

     "Sixty-two days. I've looked it up; it's sixty days with a normal
range to seventy."

     "So it's any time now. I'll bet you two back rubs that we are up
all night tonight. Cats never have kittens at a convenient hour." Karen
abruptly changed the subject. "Barbie, what do you miss most? Cigarettes?"

     "I've quit thinking of them. Eggs, I guess. Eggs for breakfast."

     "Daddy did plan for that. Fertilized eggs and a little incubator.
But he hadn't built it and anyhow, eggs would have busted. Yes, I miss
eggs. But I wish cows laid eggs and Daddy had figured out how to bring
cow eggs along. Ice cream! Cold milk!"

     "Butter," agreed Barbara. "Banana splits with whipped cream.
Chocolate malts."

     "Stop it! Barbie, I'm starving in front of your eyes."

     Barbara pinched her. "You aren't fading way. Fact is, you've put on
weight."

     "Perhaps." Karen shut up and began on the dishes.

     Presently she said in a low voice, "Barbie, Doe won't hand this
household half the surprise I'm going to."

     "How, hon?"

     "I'm pregnant."

     "Huh?"

     "You heard me. Pregnant. Knocked up, if you insist on the technical
term!"

     "Are you sure, dear?"

     "Of course I'm sure! I had a test, the froggie winked at me. Hell,
I'm four months gone." Karen threw herself into the arms of the older
girl. "And I'm scared!"

     Barbara hugged her. "There, there, dear. It's going to be all right."

     "The hell it is," Karen blubbered. "Mother's going to raise hell. .
. and there aren't any hospitals. . . nor doctors. Oh, why didn't Duke
study medicine? Barbie, I'm going to die. I know I am."

     "Karen, that's silly. More babies have been born without doctors
and hospitals than ever were wheeled into a delivery room. You're not
scared of dying, you're scared of telling your parents."

     "Well, that, too." Karen wiped at her eyes and sniffed. "Uh-
Barbie, don't be mad. . . but that's why I invited you down that weekend."

     "I figured Mother wouldn't raise quite so much hell if you were
present. Most girls in our chapter are either squares or sluts, and
silly heads besides. But you are neither and I knew you would stand up
for me."

     "Thank you, dear."

     "Thank me, hell! I was using you."

     "It's the finest compliment another woman ever paid me." Barbara
wiped a tear from Karen's face and tweaked her cheek. "I'm glad I'm
here. So you haven't told your parents?"

     "Well, I was going to. But the attack hit . . . and then Mother
went to pieces. . . and Daddy has been loaded down with worries and
there's never been the right time."

     "Karen, you aren't scared to tell your father, just your mother."

     "Well. . . Mother mostly. But Daddy, too. Besides being shocked and
hurt-he'll think it was silly of me to get caught."

     "While he's certain to be surprised, I doubt the other." Barbara
hesitated. "Karen, you needn't take this alone. I can share it."

     "That's what I had hoped. That's why I asked you to come home with
me. I told you."

     "I mean really share it. I'm pregnant, too."

     "What?"

     "Yes. We can tell them together."

     "Good Lord, Barbara! How did it happen?"

     Barbara shrugged. "Careless. How did it happen to you?" Karen
suddenly grinned. "How? A bee sprinkled pollen on me; how else? 'Who'
you mean."

     "'Who' I don't care about. Your business. Well, dear? Shall we go
tell them? I'll do the talking."

     "Wait a minute. You hadn't planned to tell anybody? Or had you?"

     "Why, no," Barbara answered truthfully, "I was going to wait until
it showed."

     Karen looked at Barbara's waistline. "It doesn't show. Are you sure?"

     "I've skipped two periods, I'm pregnant. Or I'm ill, which would be
worse. Let's gather up the laundry and tell them.

     "Uh, since you don't look it-and I do; I've been careful not to
undress around Mother-since you don't, let's hold that back and use it
as a whammy if things get sticky."

     "If you like. Karen, why not tell Hugh first? Then let him tell
your mother."

     Karen looked relieved. "You think that's all right?"

     "Hugh would rather hear it with your mother not around. Now go find
him and tell him. I'll hang the clothes."

     "All right, I will!"

     "And quit worrying. We'll have our babies and won't have any
trouble and we'll raise them together and it'll be fun. We'll be happy."

     Karen's eyes lit up. "And you'll have a girl and I'll have a boy
and we'll marry them and be grandmothers together!"

     "That sounds more like Karen." Barbara kissed her. "Run tell Hugh."

 

     Karen found Hugh bricking up the kiln; she told him that she would
like a private talk.

     "All right," he agreed. "Let me tell Joe to get this fired up. I
should inspect the ditch. Come along and talk?"

     He gave her a shovel, carried a rifle. "Now what's on your mind,
baby girl?"

     "Let's get farther away." They walked a meandering distance. Hugh
stopped, exchanged rifle for shovel, and built up a stretch of wall.

     "Daddy? Perhaps you've noticed a shortage of men?"

     "No. Three men and three women. The usual division."

     "Perhaps I should say 'eligible bachelors.'"

     "Then say it."

     "All right, I've said it. I need advice. Which is worse? Incest? Or
miscegenation? Or should I be an old maid?"

     He placed another shovelful, tamped it. "I would not urge you to be
an old maid."

     "That settles that, I feel the same way. How do you size up those
other fates?"

     "Incest," he answered, "is a bad idea, usually."

     "Which leaves just one thing."

     "Wait. I said, 'Usually.'" He stared at the shovel. "This is not a
problem I ever expected-but we are facing many new problems.
Brother-and-sister marriages are not uncommon in history. They are not
necessarily bad." He frowned. "But there is Barbara. You might have to
accept a polygamous household."

     "Hold it, Daddy. 'Incest' isn't just brothers."

     He stared at her. "You've managed to startle me, Karen."

     "Shocked you, you mean."

     "No. 'Startled.' Were you seriously suggesting what you implied?"

     "Daddy," she said soberly, "it's one subject I can't joke about. If
I had to choose between you and Duke-as a husband, I mean-I'd take you
and no two ways about it."

     Hugh mopped his forehead. "Karen, such a statement can be honored
only by taking it seriously-"

     "I'm serious!"

     "And I so take it. Do I understand that you have eliminated Joseph?
Or have you considered him?"

     "Certainly I have."

     "Well?"

     "How could I avoid it, Daddy? Joe is nice. But he's just a boy,
even though he's older than I am. If I said, 'Boo!' he would jump out of
his skin. No."

     "Does his skin have something to do with your choice?"

     "Daddy, you tempt me to spit in your face. I'm not Mother!"

     "I wanted to be sure. Karen, you know that color does not matter to
me. I want to know other things about a man. Is his word good? Does he
meet his obligations? Does he do honest work? Is he brave? Will he stand
up and be counted? Joe is very much a man by all standards that interest
me. I think you are being hasty."

     He sighed. "If we were in Mountain Springs, I would not urge you to
marry any Negro. The pressures are too great; such a marriage is almost
always a tragedy. But those barbaric factors do not obtain here. I urge
that you give Joe serious thought."

     "Daddy, don't you think I have? I may marry Joe. But I wanted you
to know that if I had my choice, out of you three I would pick you."

     "Thank you."

     "Thank me, hell! I'm a woman and you are the man I would most like
to. And a fat lot of good it will do me-and you know why. Mother."

     "I know." He suddenly looked weary. "We do not what we wish, but
what we can. Karen, I am dreadfully sorry that you do not have a longer
list to choose from."

     "Daddy, if I've learned anything from you, it is that it's a waste
of tears to cry over anything that can't be helped. That's Mother, not
me. And Duke, though not as bad. I'm just like you on this point- You
count your points and play accordingly. You don't moan about how the
cards aren't fair. Dig me, Daddy?"

     "Yes."

     "I didn't come here to ask you to marry me. Nor even to seduce you
though I might as well say, having said so much, that you can have me if
you want me. I think you've known that for years. I didn't come here to
say that, either. I simply had to get things out of the way before I
told you something else. Something where I've counted the points and I'm
going set and that's that. Can't be helped."

     "What? Perhaps I can help."

     "Hardly. I'm pregnant, Daddy."

     He dropped the shovel, took her in both arms. "Oh, wonderful!"

     Presently she said, "Daddy - . . I can't shoot a bear with you
hugging me."

     He put her down, grabbed the rifle. "Where?"

     "Nowhere. But you're always warning us."

     "Oh. All right, I'll take over guard duty. Who's the father, Karen?
Duke? or Joe?"

     "Neither. Earlier, at school."

     "Oh. Still better!"

     "How? Damn it, Daddy, this isn't going the way it's supposed to. A
girl comes home ruined, her father is supposed to raise hell. All you
say is, 'Just dandy!' You've got me confused."

     "Sorry. Under other circumstances, I might feel that you had been
careless-"

     "Oh, I was! I took a chance, like the nigguh mammy who said, 'Oh,
hunnuhds of times ain't nuffin happen at all.' You know."

     "I'm afraid I do. Under these circumstances I am delighted. I had
assumed that you were inexperienced. To learn that, instead, you have
gone ahead and given us a child and one whose father is from outside our
group- Don't you see, dear? You have almost doubled the chances of this
colony surviving."

     "I have?"

     "Figure it out, you're not stupid. Your child's father- Good stock?"

     "Would I have been doing what I most certainly did if I hadn't
thought pretty well of him, Daddy?"

     "Sorry, dear. It was a stupid question." He smiled. "I don't feel
like working. Let's go spread the good news."

     "All right. But, Daddy- What do we tell Mother?"

     "The truth, and I'll do the telling. Don't worry, baby girl. You
have that baby and I will take care of all else."

     "Yes, sir. Daddy, I feel real good now."

     "That's fine."

     "I feel so good that I almost forgot something. Did you know that
Dr.-Livingstone-I-Presume is going to have babies, too?"

     "Yes."

     "Why didn't you tell me?"

     "You had the same chance to notice that I did."

     "Well, yes. But it's pretty frowsy, your noticing that Doe is
pregnant-and not noticing that I am."

     "I thought you had simply been overeating again."

     "You did, huh? Daddy, sometimes I like you better than other times.
But this time I guess I'm going to have to like you anyhow."

     Hugh decided to eat dinner before stirring up Grace.

     The decision was justified. From her rantings, it appeared that
Karen was an ungrateful daughter, a disgrace, a shameless little tramp,
and that Hugh was an unnatural father, a failure, and somehow to blame
for his daughter's pregnancy.

     Hugh let her rant until she paused for breath. "Grace. Be quiet."

     "What? Hubert Farnham, don't you dare tell me to shut up! How can
you sit there, when your own daughter has flagrantly dis-"

     "Shut up or I will shut you up."

     Duke said, "Pipe down, Mother."

     "You, too? Oh, that I should ever see the day when-"

     "Mother, keep still for a while. Let's hear from Dad."

     Grace simmered, then said, "Joseph! Leave the room."

     "Joe, sit down," Hugh ordered.

     "Yes, Joe," agreed Karen. "Please stay."

     "Well! If neither of you has the common decency to-"

     "Grace, I am nearer to striking you than I have ever been in all
these years. Will you keep quiet and listen?"

     She looked at her son; Duke was carefully looking elsewhere. "Very
well, I will listen. Not that it can possibly do any good."

     "I hope that it will because it is supremely important. Grace,
there is no point in heckling Karen. Besides being cruel, it's
ridiculous. Her pregnancy is the best thing that has happened to us."

     "Hubert Farnham, are you out of your mind?"

     "Please. You are reacting in terms of conventional morality, which
is foolish."

     "Oh? So morals are foolish, are they? You hymn-singing hypocrite!"

     "Morals are not foolish; morals must be our bedrock, always. But
whether it was moral for Karen to breed a baby at another time and
place, in a society that is no more, is irrelevant; we will not discuss
it. The fact is, she did-and it is a blessing to us. Please analyze it.
Six of us, four from one family. Genetically that is too small a
breeding stock. Yet somehow we must flourish-or saving our own lives is
wasted. But now we have a seventh, not here in person. That's better
than we had any reason to hope. I pray that the twins that run in my
family will show up in her. It would strengthen the stock."

     "How can you talk about your own daughter as if you were breeding a
cow!"

     "She is my daughter whom I love. But more important- her supreme
importance-is that she is a woman and pregnant. I wish that you and
Barbara were pregnant, too-by outsiders. We need variety for the next
generation."

     "I will not sit here and be insulted!"

     "I simply said 'wish.' In Karen we do have this miracle; we must
cherish it. Grace, Karen must be treated with every consideration during
her pregnancy. You must take care of her."

     "Are you insinuating that I wouldn't? You are the one who cares
nothing about her welfare. Your own daughter."

     "It doesn't matter that she is my daughter. It would apply if it
were Barbara, or you, or another woman. No more heavy work for Karen.
That laundry she did today-you'll do that; you've loafed long enough.
You'll pamper her. But most urgent, there will be no more scoldings, no
harsh words, no recriminations. You will be sweet and kind and gentle
with her. Don't fail in this, Grace. Or I will punish you."

     "You wouldn't dare!"

     "I hope I won't be forced to." Hugh faced his son. "Duke. Do I have
your backing? Speak up."

     "What do you mean by 'punishment,' Dad?"

     "Whatever we are forced to use. Words. Social sanctions. Physical
punishment if we must. Even expulsion from our group if no other choice
remained."

     Duke drummed on the table. "That's putting it brutally, Dad."

     "Yes. I want you to think about the extremes."

     Duke glanced at his sister. "I'll back you. Mother, you've got to
behave."

     She started to whimper. "My own son has turned against me. Oh, I
wish I had never been born!"

     "Barbara?"

     "My opinion? I agree with you, Hugh. Karen needs kindness. She
mustn't be scolded."

     "You keep out of this!"

     Barbara looked at Grace without expression. "I'm sorry but Hugh
asked me. Karen asked me to be in it, too. I think you have behaved
abominably, Grace. A baby isn't a calamity."

     "That's easy for you to say!"

     "Perhaps. But you've been nagging Karen steadily-and really, you
mustn't."

     Karen said suddenly, "Tell them, Barbara. About yourself."

     "You want me to?"

     "You'd better. Or now she'll start on you."

     "Very well." Barbara bit her lip. "I said that a baby is not a
calamity. I'm pregnant, too-and I'm very happy about it."

     The silence told Barbara that her purpose of taking the heat off
Karen had been achieved. As for herself, she was tranquil for the first
time since she had begun to suspect that she was pregnant. She had not
shed a tear-oh, no!-but she found that a tension she had not been
conscious of was gone.

     "Why, you tramp! No wonder my daughter went wrong, exposed to
influences like-"

     "Stop it, Grace!"

     "Yes, Mother," agreed Duke. "Better keep quiet."

     "I was just going to say-"

     "You're not going to say anything, Mother. I mean it."

     Mrs. Farnham subsided. Hugh went on: "Barbara, I hope you are not
fibbing. Trying to protect Karen."

     Barbara looked at him and could read no expression. "I am not
fibbing, Hugh. I am between two and three months pregnant."

     "Well, the rejoicing is now doubled. We will have to relieve you of
heavy work, too. Duke, can you take on some farming?"

     "Certainly."

     "Joe can do some, too. Mmm- I must push ahead with the kitchen and
bathroom. You'll both need such comforts long before either baby is
born. Joe, that bearproof extra room can't be put off now; nursery space
will be essential and we men will have to move out. I think-"

     "Hugh-"

     "Yes, Barbara?"

     "Don't worry tonight. I can garden, I'm not as far along as Karen
and I've had no morning sickness. I'll let you know when I need help."

     He looked thoughtful. "No."

     "Oh, heaven! I like gardening. Pioneer mothers always worked when
pregnant. They stopped when the pains came."

     "And it killed them, too. Barbara, we can't spare either of you.
We'll treat you as the precious jewels you are." He looked around. "Right?"

     "Right, Dad."

     "Sure thing, Hugh!"

     Mrs Farnham stood up. "Really, this conversation is making me ill."

     "Good night, Grace. No farming for you, Barbara."

     "But I like my farm. I'll quit in time."

     "You can supervise. Don't let me catch you using a spading fork.
Nor weeding. You might shake something loose. You're a gentleman farmer
now."

     "Does it say in your books how much work a pregnant woman may do?"

     "I'll read up on it. But we'll err on the conservative side. Some
doctors keep patients in bed for months to avoid losing a baby."

     "Daddy, you don't expect us to stay in bed!"

     "Probably not, Karen. But we will be very careful." He added,
"Barbara is right; it can't all be settled tonight. Bridge, anyone? Or
has there been too much excitement?"

     "Hell, no!" Karen answered. "I can use pampering but bridge is one
thing that can't cause a miscarriage. I think."

     "No," agreed her father. "But the way you bid might cause heart
failure in someone else."

     "Pooh. Who wants to bid like a computer? Live dangerously, I always
say."

     "You do, dear."

     They got no further than dealing. Dr. Livingstone, who had been
sleeping in the "bathroom," at that moment came into the main room,
walking stiff-legged and almost dragging hindquarters. "Joseph," the cat
announced, "I am going to have these babies right now1~'

     The cat's anguished wailing, its hobbled gait, made its meaning
clear as words. Joe was out of his chair at once. "Doe! What's the
matter, Doe?"

     He started to pick the cat up. That was not what Dr. Livingstone
needed; it wailed louder and struggled. Hugh said, "Joe. Let it be."

     "But old Doe hurts."

     "So let's take care of the matter. Duke, we'll use electric lights
and the camp lamp. Snuff the candles. Karen, blankets on the table and a
clean sheet."

     "Right away."

     Hugh knelt by the cat. "Easy, Doe. It hurts, doesn't it? Never
mind, it won't be long. We're here, we're here." He smoothed the fur
along the spine, then gently felt the abdomen. "Contraction. Hurry up,
Karen."

     "Ready, Daddy!"

     "Lift with me, Joe."

     They placed the cat on the table. Joe said, "What do we do now?"

     "Give you a Miltown."

     "But Doe hurts."

     "Surely she does. We can't do anything about it. She's having a bad
time. It's her first litter and she's frightened, and she's older than
she should be, for a first. Not good."

     "But we have to do something."

     "You can help by quieting down; you're communicating your fear to
her. Joe, if there were anything I could do, I would. But there isn't
much we can do but stand by and let her know that she is not alone. Keep
her from being frightened. Do you want that tranquilizer?"

     "Uh, I guess so."

     "Get it, Duke. Don't leave, Joe; Doe trusts you."

     "Hubert, if you are going to stay up all night over a cat again,
I'll need a sleeping pill. You can't expect a person to sleep with all
this fuss."

     "A Seconal for your mother, Duke. Can anybody think of anything we
can use as a kitten bed?" Hugh Farnham searched his memory. Every box,
every scrap of lumber, had been used and re-used and re-re-used in
endless make-do building. Build a nest of bricks? Not sooner than
daylight and this poor animal needed a safe and comforting spot tonight.
Take apart some shelves?

     "Daddy, how about the bottom wardrobe drawer?"

     "Perfect! Pile everything on a bunk. Pad it. Use my hunting jacket.
Duke, rig a frame to support a blanket; she'll want a little cave she'll
feel safe in. You know."

     "Of course we know," Karen chided. "Quit jittering, Daddy. This
isn't our first litter."

     "Sorry, baby. We are about to have a kitten. See that, Joe?" Fur
rippled from the cat's middle down toward the tail, then did so again.

     Karen hurriedly threw everything out of the lowest wardrobe drawer,
placed it against the wall and put the hunting jacket in it, rushed
back. "Did I miss it?"

     "No," Hugh assured her. "But right now!"

     Doe stopped panting to give one wail and was delivered of a kitten
in two quick convulsions.

     "Why, it's wrapped in cellophane," Barbara said wonderingly.

     "Didn't you know?" asked Karen. "Daddy, it's gray! Doe, where have
you been? Though maybe I shouldn't bring that up."

     Neither Hugh nor Dr. Livingstone answered. The mother cat started
vigorously licking her offspring, broke the covering, and tiny ratlike
arms and legs waved helplessly. A squeak so thin and high as to be
almost inaudible announced its opinion of the world. Doe bit the cord
and went on licking, cleaning off blood and mucus and purring loudly at
the same time. The baby didn't like it and again vented almost silent
protest.

     "Boss," demanded Joe, "what's wrong with it? It's so skinny and
little."

     "Its a fine kitten. It's a pretty baby, Doe. He's a bachelor, he
doesn't know." Hugh spoke cooingly and rubbed the eat between her ears.
He went on in normal tones, "And the worst ease of bar sinister I ever
saw-smooth-haired, tiger-striped, and gray."

     Doe looked up reprovingly, gave a shudder and delivered the
afterbirth, began chewing the bloody mass. Barbara gulped and rushed to
the door, fumbled at a bolt. Karen went after her, opened it and
steadied her while she threw up.

     "Duke!" Hugh snapped. "Bear guard!"

     Duke followed them, stuck his head out. Karen said, "Go 'way! We're
safe. Bright moonlight."

     "Well. . . leave the door open." He withdrew.

     Karen said, "I thought you weren't having morning sickness?"

     "I'm not. Oh!" Retching again hit her. "It was what Doe did."

     "Oh, that. Cats always do that. Let me wipe your mouth, dear."

     "It's awful."

     "It's normal. Good for them. Hormones, or something; you can ask
Hugh. All right now?"

     "I think so. Karen! We don't have to do that? Do we? I won't, I won't!"

     "Huh? Oh! Never thought of it. Oh, I know we don't-or they would
have told us in Smut One."

     "Lots of things they don't mention in Smut One," Barbara said
darkly. "When I had to take it, it was taught by an old maid. But I
won't. I'll resign first, not have this baby."

     "Comrade," Karen said grimly, "that's something we both should have
thought of earlier. Stand aside, it's my turn to heave."

     Presently they went inside, pale but steady. Dr. Livingstone had
three more kittens and Barbara managed to watch without further rushes
for the door. Of the other birthings only the third was notable: a tiny
tomcat but large in its tininess. He was a breech presentation, the
skull did not pass easily, and Doe in her pain clamped down.

     Hugh was busy at once, pulling gently on the little body with his
whole hand and sweating like a surgeon. Doe wailed and bit his thumb. He
did not let it stop him nor hurry him.

     Suddenly the kitten came free; he bent over and blew in its mouth,
was rewarded with a thin, indignant squeak. He put the baby down, let
Dr. Livingstone clean it. "That was close," he said shakily.

     "Old Doe didn't mean to," Joe said softly.

     "Of course not. Which of you girls feels like fixing this for me?"

     Barbara dressed the wound, while telling herself that she must not,
must not, bite when her own time came.

     The kittens were, in order, smooth-haired gray, fluffy white,
midnight black with white jabot and mittens, and calico. After much
argument between Karen and Joe, they were named: Happy New Year, Snow
Princess Magnificent, Dr. Ebony Midnight, and Patchwork Girl of
Oz-Happy, Maggie, Midnight, and Patches.

     By midnight mother and children were bedded in the drawer with
food, water, and sandbox near, and everyone went to bed. Joe slept on
the floor with his head by the kitten nest.

     When everyone was quiet, he raised up, used the flash to look in.
Dr. Livingstone had one kitten in her arms, three more at suck; she
stopped cleaning Maggie and looked inquiringly at him.

     "They're beautiful kittens, Doe," he told her. "The best babies."

     She spread her royal whiskers and purred agreement.

 

 

 

Chapter 8

 

 

 

      Hugh leaned on his shovel. "That does it, Joe."

     "Let me tidy up around the gate." They were at the upper end of
their ditch where the stream had been dammed against the dry season. It
had been on them for weeks; the forest was sere, the heat oppressive.
They were extremely careful about fire.

     But no longer so careful about bears. It was still standard
practice to be armed, but Duke had killed so many carnivores, ursine and
feline, they seldom saw one.

     The water spilling over the dam was only a trickle but there was
water for irrigation and for household needs. Without the ditch they
would have lost their garden.

     It was necessary every day or so to adjust the flow. Hugh had not
built a water gate; paucity of tools, scarcity of metal, and a total
lack of lumber had baffled him. Instead he had devised an expedient. The
point where water was taken from the pond had been faced with brick and
a spillway set of half-round tile. To increase the flow this was taken
out, the spill cut deeper, bricks adjusted, and tiles replaced. It was
clumsy; it worked.

     The bottom of the ditch was tiled all the way to house and garden;
a minimum of water was lost. Their kiln had worked day and night; most
of their capital gain had come out of the clay bank below the house and
it was becoming difficult to dig good clay.

     This did not worry Hugh; they had almost everything they needed.

     Their bathroom was no longer a joke. Water flowed in a two-stall
trough toilet partitioned with deerhide; tile drainpipe "leaded" with
clay ran down the manhole, out the tunnel, and to a cesspool.

     Forming drainpipe Hugh had found very difficult. After many
failures he had whittled a male form in three parts-in parts, because it
was necessary to shape the clay over it, let it dry enough to take out
the form before it cracked from shrinking over the form.

     With practice he cut his failures to about 25 percent in forming,
25 percent in firing.

     The damaged water tank he had cut painfully, mallet and chisel,
lengthwise into tubs, a bathtub indoors and a washtub outdoors. The
seams he had calked with shaved hide; the tubs did not leak-much.

     A brick fireplace-oven filled one corner of the bath-kitchen. It
was not in use; days were long and hot; they cooked outdoors and ate
under an awning of empty bears-but it was ready against the next rainy
season.

     Their house now had two stories. Hugh had concluded that an
addition strong enough to stop bears and tight enough to discourage
snakes would have to be of stone, and solidly roofed. That he could
do-but how about windows and doors? Glass he would make someday if he
solved the problems of soda and lime. But not soon. A stout door and
tight shutters he could manage, but such a cabin would be stuffy.

     So they had built a shed on the roof, a grass shack. With the
ladder up, a bear faced a twelve-foot wall. Unsure that a wall would
stop all their neighbors, Hugh had arranged trip lines around the edge
so that disturbing them would cause an oxygen bottle to fall over. Their
alarm was tripped the first week, scaring off the intruder. It had also,
Hugh admitted, scared the bejasus out of him.

     Anything that could not be hurt by weather had been moved out and
the main room was rearranged into a women's dormitory and nursery. Hugh
stared downstream while Joe finished fussing. He could make out the roof
of his penthouse. Good enough, he mused. Everything was in fair shape
and next year would be better. So much better that they might take time
to explore. Even Duke had not been as much as twenty miles away. Nothing
but feet for travel and too busy scratching to live- Next year would be
soon enough.

     "A man's reach should exceed his grasp, or what's a heaven for?"
They had started with neither pot nor window. This year a pot- Next year
a window? No hurry- Things were going well. Even Grace seemed contented.
He felt certain that she would settle down and be a happy grandmother.
Grace liked babies, Grace did well with babies- How well he remembered.

     Not long now. Baby Karen was fuzzily vague but her guesses seemed
to show that D-day was about two weeks off, and her condition matched
her guess, as near as he could tell.

     The sooner the better! Hugh had studied everything in his library
on pregnancy and childbirth; he had made every preparation he could. His
patients seemed to be in perfect health, both had satisfactory pelvic
measurements, both seemed unafraid, and they helped each other with
friendly nagging, not to gain too much weight. With Barbara to hold
Karen's hand, with Karen to hold Barbara's hand, with Grace's motherly
experience to bolster them, Hugh could see no trouble ahead.

     It would be wonderful to have babies in the house.

     With a warm wave of euphoria Hugh Farnham realized that he had
never been so happy in his life.

 

     "That's it, Hugh. Let's catch those tiles on the way back."

     "Okay. Take the rifle, I'll carry the tools."

     "I think," Joe said, "we ought to-"

     His words chopped off at a gunshot; they froze. It was followed by
two more. They ran.

     Barbara was in the door. She held up a gun and waved, went inside.
She came out before they reached the house, stepping carefully down off
the stoop and moving slowly; she was very gravid. Her belly bulged huge
in shorts made from wornout jeans that had belonged to Duke; she wore a
man's shirt altered to support her breasts. She was barefooted and no
longer carried the gun.

     Joe outdistanced Hugh, met her near the house. "Karen?" he demanded.

     "Yes. She's started."

     Joe hurried inside. Hugh arrived, stood panting. "Well?"

     "Her bag of waters burst. Then the pains started. That was when I
fired."

     "Why didn't you- Never mind. What else?"

     "Grace is with her. But she wants you."

     "Let me catch my breath." Hugh wiped his face, tried to control his
trembling. He took a deep breath, held it, let it out slowly. He went
inside, Barbara following.

     The bunks near the door had been taken down. A bed stuck out into
the doorway but space cleared by removing shelves left passage. One bunk
was now a cot in the living corner. The bed was padded with a grass
mattress and a bear rug; a calico cat was on it.

     Hugh squeezed past, felt another eat brush his ankles. He went into
the other bay. The bunks there had been rebuilt into a bed across the
end; Karen was in bed, Grace was seated, fanning her, and Joe stood by
with an air of grave concern.

     Hugh smiled at his daughter. "Hi, Fatty!" He stooped and kissed
her. "How are you? Hurting?"

     "Not now. But I'm glad you're here."

     "We hurried."

     A cat jumped up, landing on Karen. "Unh! Damn you, Maggie!"

     "Joe," said Hugh, "round up the cats and put them in Coventry." The
tunnel mouth had been bricked up, but with air holes, and a cat door
which could be filled with a large brick. The cats had a low opinion of
this but it had been built after Happy New Year had become missing and
presumed dead.

     Karen said, "Daddy, I want Maggie with me!"

     "Joe, make that all but Maggie. When we get busy, grab Maggie and
shut her up, too."

     "Can do, Hugh." Joe left, passing Barbara coming in.

     Hugh felt Karen's cheeks, took her pulse. He said to his wife, "Is
she shaved?"

     "There hasn't been time."

     "You and Barbara get her shaved and washed. Punkin', when did your
bowels move?"

     "Just did. I was on the pot when it happened. Just sitting there
minding my own business-and all of a sudden I'm Niagara Falls!"

     "But your bowels moved?"

     "Oh, yes!"

     "That's one less thing to worry about." He smiled. "Not that
there's anything to worry about, you'll play bridge most of the night.
Like kittens, babies show up in the wee, sma' hours."

     "All night? I want to have this little bastard and get it over with."

     "I want it over with, too, but babies have minds of their own." He
added, "You'll be busy a while and so will I. I'm dirty." He started to
leave.

     "Daddy, wait a minute. Do I have to stay back here? It's hot."

     "No. The light is better by the door. Especially if young Tarzan
has the decency to arrive during daylight. Barbara, turn that used bear
over; it'll be cooler. Put this sheet on it. Or a clean one if there is
one."

     "The sterilized one?"

     "No. Don't unpack the boiled sheet until the riot starts." Hugh
patted his patient's hand. "Try not to have a pain until I'm clean."

     "Daddy, you should have been a doctor."

     "I am a doctor. The best doctor in the world."

     As he left the house he encountered Duke, soaked from a long run.
"I heard three shots. Sis?"

     "Yes. No hurry, labor just started. I'm about to take a bath. Want
to join me?"

     "I want to say hello to Sis first."

     "Hurry up; they're about to bathe her. And grab Joe; he's
incarcerating cats. They'll want us out of the way."

     "Shouldn't we be boiling water?"

     "Do so, if it will calm you. Duke, my O.B. kit, such as it is, has
been ready for a month. There are six jars of boiled water, for this and
that. Go kiss your sister and don't let her see that you're worried."

     "You're a cold fish, Dad."

     "Son, I'm scared silly. I can list thirteen major complications-and
I'm not prepared to cope with any of them. Mostly I pat her hand and
tell her that everything is dandy-and that's what she needs. I examine
her, solemn as a judge, and don't know what to look for. It's just to
reassure her . . . and I'll thank you to help out."

     Duke said soberly, "I will, sir. I'll kid her along."

     "Don't overdo it. Just let her see that you share her confidence in
old Doe Farnham."

     "I will."

     "If Joe gets the jitters, get him out. He's the worst. Grace is
doing fine. Hurry up or they won't let you in."

     Later, bathed and calmed down, Hugh climbed out of the stream ahead
of Joe and Duke, walked back carrying his clothes and letting the air
dry him. He paused outside, put on clean shorts. "Knock, knock!"

     "Stay out," Grace called. "We're busy."

     "Then cover her. I want to scrub."

     "Don't be silly, Mother. Come in, Daddy."

     He went in, squeezing around Barbara and Grace, and on into the
bathroom. He trimmed his nails very closely, scrubbed his hands with
ditch water-then again with boiled water, and repeated it. He shook them
dry and went into the main room, being careful not to touch anything.

     Karen was on the bed at the door, a ragged half sheet over her. Her
shoulders were swaddled in a grayish garment that had been the shirt
Hugh had worn the night of the attack. Grace and Barbara were seated on
the bed, Duke stood outside the door, and Joe sat mournfully on the bunk
beyond the bed.

     Hugh smiled at her. "How is it going? Any twinges?"

     "Nary a twinge, damn it. I want to have him before dinner."

     "You will. Because you don't get any dinner."

     "Beast. My daddy is a beast."

     "Doctor Beast, please. Skedaddle, friends, I want to examine my
patient. Everyone but Grace. Barbara, go lie down."

     "I'm not tired."

     "You may be awake most of the night. Take a nap. I don't want to
cope with a seven-month preemie."

     He folded back the sheet, looked Karen over, and palpated her
swollen belly. "Has he been kicking?"

     "Has he! I'm going to sign him up with the Green Bay Packers. I
think he's wearing shoes."

     "Wouldn't be surprised. Did you have shoes on when you started him?"

     "What? Daddy, you are a nasty man. Yes."

     "Prenatal influence. Next time take them off." He tried to judge
whether the child was in the head-down position, or whether it was-God
forbid!-a breech presentation. He was unable to decide. So he smiled at
Karen and lied. "Shoes won't bother us, as he is head down, just as he
should be. It's going to be an easy birth."

     "How can you tell, Daddy?"

     "Put your hand where mine is. That's his little pointy head, all
set to take the dive. Feel it?"

     "I guess so."

     "You could see, if you were where I am." He tried to see if she was
dilated. There was a little blood and he decided against a tactile
examination-he did not know how it should feel and handling the birth
canal would increase danger of infection. He knew that a rectal
exploration should tell him something but be did not know what-so there
was no point in submitting Karen to that indignity.

     He looked up, caught his wife's eye and thought of asking her
opinion, decided not to. Despite having borne children, Grace knew no
more about it than he did; the only result would be to shake Karen's
confidence. -

     Instead he got his "stethoscope" (three end papers from his
encyclopaedia, rolled into a tube) and listened for fetal heartbeat. He
had often heard it lately. But he got only a variety of noises which he
lumped in his mind as "gut rumble."

     "Ticking like a metronome," he 'announced, putting the tube down
and covering her. "Your baby's in fine shape, baby girl, and so are you.
Grace, did you start a log when the first pain showed?"

     "Barbara did."

     "Will you keep it, please? But first tell Duke to take the ropes
off the other bed and rig them here."

     "Hubert, are you sure she should pull on ropes? Neither of my
doctors had me do anything of the sort."

     "It's the latest thing," he reassured her. "All hospitals use them
now." Hugh had read somewhere that midwives often had their patients
pull on ropes while bearing down. He had looked for this in his books,
could not find it. But it struck him as sound mechanics; a woman should
be able to bear down better.

     Grace looked doubtful but dropped the matter and left the shelter.
Hugh started to get up. Karen grabbed his hand. "Don't go 'way, Daddy!"

     "Pain?"

     "No. Something to tell you. I asked Joe to marry me. Last week. And
he accepted."

     "I'm glad to hear it, dear. I think you are getting a prize."

     "I do, too. Oh, it's Hobson's choice but I do love him, quite a
lot. But we won't get married until I'm up and around and strong. I
couldn't face the row with Mother, not now."

     "I won't tell her."

     "Better not tell Duke, either. Barbara knows., she thinks it's swell."

     A contraction hit Karen while Duke war adjusting ropes. She yelped,
chopped it off and gritted her teeth, reached for the ropes as Duke
hastily handed them to her. Hugh put his hand on her belly, felt her
womb harden as increasing pain showed in her face. "Bear down, baby," he
told her. "And pant; it helps." .

     She started to pant, it turned into a scream.

     Endless seconds later she relaxed, forced a smile and said, "They
went that a-way! Sorry about the sound effects, Daddy."

     "Yell if you want to. But panting does more good. Now rest while
you can. Let's get this organized. Joe, you're drafted as cook. I want
Barbara to rest and Grace to nurse-so you cook dinner, please. Fix some
cold supper, too. Grace, did you log it?"

     "Yes."

     "Did you time the contraction?"

     "I did," Barbara answered. "Forty-four seconds."

     Karen looked indignant. "Barb, you are out of your mind! It was
over an hour."

     "Call it forty-five seconds," Hugh said. "I want the time of each
pain and how long it lasts."

     Seven minutes later the next one hit. Karen managed to pant,
screamed only a little. But she did not feel like joking afterwards; she
turned her face away. The contraction had been long and severe. Though
shaken by his daughter's agony, Hugh felt encouraged; it seemed certain
that labor was going to be short.

     It was not. All that hot and weary day the woman brought to bed
fought to void herself of her burden-white-faced and shrieking, belly
hardening with each attempt, muscles in arms and neck standing out as
she strained-then fell back limp as the contraction died away, tired and
trembling, not speaking, uninterested in anything but the ordeal.

     It got steadily worse. Contractions became only three minutes
apart, each one longer and seeming to hurt more. Once Hugh told her not
to use the ropes; he could not see that they helped. Quickly she asked
for them and seemed not to have heard him. She did seem slightly less
uncomfortable braced against them.

     At nine that night there was bleeding. Grace became frantic; she
had heard many stories of the dangers of hemorrhage. Hugh assured her
that it was normal and showed that the baby would arrive soon. He
believed it, as it was not massive and did not continue-and it did not
seem possible that birth could be far away.

     Grace looked angry and got up; Barbara slipped into the chair she
vacated. Hugh hoped that Grace would rest-the women had been taking turns.

     But Grace returned a few minutes later. "Hubert," she said in a
high, brittle voice. "Hubert, I'm goi1~g to call a doctor."

     "Do that," he agreed, his eyes on Karen.

     "You listen to me, Hubert Farnham. You should have called a doctor
at once. You're killing her, you hear me? I'm going to call a doctor-and
you are not going to stop me."

     "Yes, Grace. The telephone is in there." He pointed into the other
wing. Grace looked puzzled, then turned suddenly and went away. "Duke!"

     His son hurried in. "Yes, Dad?"

     Hugh said forcefully, "Duke, your mother has decided to telephone
for a doctor. You go help her. Do you understand?"

     Duke's eyes widened. "Where are the needles?"

     "In the smaller bundle on the table. Don't touch the large bundle;
it's sterile."

     "Got it. What dosage?"

     "Two c.c. Don't let her see the needle, or she'll jerk." Hugh's
head jerked; he realized that he was groggy. "Make that three c.c.; I
want her to go out like a light and sleep until morning. She can
tolerate it."

     "Right away." Duke left.

     Karen had been lying quiet between contractions, apparently in
semi-coma. Now she whispered, "Poor Daddy. Your women give you a lot of
grief."

     "Rest, dear."

     "I- Oh, God, here it comes again!"

     Then she was saying between screams: "It hurts! Make it stop! Oh,
Daddy, I do want a doctor! Please, Daddy! Get me a doctor!"

     "Bear down, darling. Bear down."

     It went on and on, far into the night, no respite and getting
worse. It stopped being worth while to log contractions; they almost
overlapped. Karen no longer could be said to talk; she screamed
incoherent demands for relief when she strained, spoke unresponsively or
did not answer in the brief periods between contractions.

     Around dawn-it seemed to Hugh that the torture had been going on
for weeks but his watch showed that Karen had been in labor eighteen
hours-Barbara said urgently, "Hugh, she can't take any more."

     "I know," he admitted, looking at his daughter. She was at the peak
of a pain, face gray and contorted, mouth squared in agony, high sobbing
moans coming out between her teeth.

     "Well?"

     "I suppose she should have had a Caesarean. But I'm no surgeon."

     "I wonder."

     "I don't. I'm not."

     "You know more about it than the first man who ever did one! You
know how to keep it sterile. We have sulfa drugs and you can load her up
with Demerol." She did not try to keep Karen from hearing; their patient
was beyond caring.

 

     "Hugh, you must. She's dying."

     "I know." He sighed. "But it's too late for a Caesarean, even ill
knew how. To save Karen with one, I mean. We might save her baby." He
blinked and swayed. "Only it would not. Who's to wet-nurse? You can't,
not yet. And cows we don't have."

     He took a deep breath, tried to get a grip on himself. "Only one
thing left. Try to get it out Eskimo style."

     "What's that?"

     "Get her up and let gravity help. Maybe it'll work. Call the boys,
we'll need them. I've got to scrub again; I might have to do an
episiotomy. Oh, God."

     Five minutes and two contractions later they were ready to try it.
When Karen lay back exhausted after the second one, Hugh tried to
explain what they were going to do. It was hard to get her attention. At
last she nodded slightly and whispered, "I don't care."

     Hugh went to the table where his equipment was now opened out, got
his one scalpel, took the camp lamp in his other hand. "All right, boys.
As soon as she starts, pick her up."

     They had only seconds to wait. Hugh saw the contraction start,
nodded to Duke. "Now!"

     "With me, Joe." They started to lift her, each with an arm under
her back, a hand under a thigh.

     Karen screamed and fought them off. "No, no! Don't touch me-I can't
stand it! Daddy, make them stop! Daddy!"

     They stopped. Duke said, "Dad?"

     "Lift her up! Now!"

     They got her high in a squatting position, thighs pulled open.
Barbara got behind Karen, arms around her, and pressed down on the
girl's tortured belly. Karen screamed and struggled; they held her fast.
Hugh got hurriedly to the floor, shined the light up. "Bear down, Karen,
bear down!"

     "Ooooooh!"

     Suddenly he saw the baby's scalp, gray-blue. He started to lay the
knife aside; the head retreated. "Try again, Karen!"

     He readjusted the lamp. He wondered whether he was supposed to make
the incision in front? Or in back? Or both? He saw the scalp show again
and stop; with his hand suddenly rock steady and with no conscious
decision he reached up and made one small cut.

     He barely had time to drop the knife before he had both hands full
of wet, slippery, bloody baby. He knew there was something else he
should do now but all he could think of was to get it by both feet in
his left hand, lift it and slap its tiny bottom.

     It let out a choked wail.

     "Get her on the bed, boys-but easy! It's still fastened by the cord."

     They made it, Hugh on his knees and burdened with a feebly wiggling
load. Once they had Karen down, Hugh started to put her baby in her
arms-but saw that Karen was not up to it. She seemed to be awake-her
eyes were open. But she was in total collapse.

     Hugh was close to collapse. He looked dazedly around, handed the
baby to Barbara. "Stay close," he told her, unnecessarily.

     "Dad?" said Duke. "Aren't you supposed to cut the cord?"

     "Not yet." Where was that knife? He found it, rubbed it quickly
with iodine-hoped that it was sterile. Placed it by two boiled lengths
of cotton string-turned and felt the cord to see if it was pulsing.

     "He's beautiful," Joe said softly.

     "She," Hugh corrected. "The baby is a girl. Now, Barbara, if you-"

     He broke off. Suddenly everything happened too fast. The baby
started to choke; Hugh grabbed it, turned it upside down, dug into its
mouth, scooped out a plug of mucus, handed the baby back, started again
to check the cord-saw that Karen was in trouble.

     With a nightmare feeling that he needed to be twins he got one of
the strings, tied a square knot around the cord near the baby's belly,
trying to control his trembling so as not to tie it too hard-started to
tie the second, saw that it was not needed; Karen suddenly delivered the
placenta and was hemorrhaging. She moaned.

     With one slash Hugh cut the cord, snapped at Barbara, "Get a
bellyband on it!"-turned to take care of the mother.

     She was flowing like a river; her face was gray and she seemed
unconscious. Too late to attempt to take stitches in the cut he had made
and the tears that followed; he could see that this flood was from
inside, not from the damaged portal. He tried to stop it by packing her
inside with their last roll of gauze while shouting to Joe and to Duke
to get a bellyband and compress on Karen herself to put pressure on her
uterus.

     Some agonized time later the belly compress was in place and the
gauze was backed by a dam of sanitary napkins-one irreplaceable, Hugh
thought tiredly, they hadn't needed much. He raised his eyes and looked
at Karen's face-then in sudden panic tried to find her pulse.

     Karen had survived the birth of her daughter by less than seven
minutes.

 

 

 

Chapter 9

 

 

 

     Katherine Josephine survived her mother by a day. Hugh baptized her
with that name and a drop of water an hour after Karen died; it was
clear that the baby might not last long. She had trouble breathing.

     Once when the baby choked, Barbara started her up again by
mouth-to-mouth suction, getting a mouthful of something she spat out
hastily. Little Jodie seemed better then for quite a while.

     But Hugh knew that it was only a reprieve; he could see no chance
of keeping the baby alive long enough-two months-to let Barbara feed it.
Only two cans of Carnation milk were left in their stores.

     Nevertheless they worked grimly around the clock.

     Grace mixed a formula from memory-evaporated milk, boiled water, a
hoarded can of white Karo. They had no food cells, not even a nipple. An
orphaned baby was a crisis for which Hugh had not planned. In hindsight
it seemed the most glaring of probable emergencies. He tried not to
brood over his failure, dedicated himself to keeping Karen's daughter alive.

     A plastic-barreled eyedropper was the nearest to a nipple they
could find. They used it to pick up the formula, try to match the
pressure with the infant's attempts to suck.

     It did not work well. Little Jodie continued to have trouble
breathing and tended to choke every time they tried to feed her; they
spent as much time trying to clear her throat and get her cranked up
again as they did in feeding her. She seemed reluctant to suck on the
harsh substitute and if they squirted food into her mouth anyway, she
always choked. Twice Grace was able to coax her into taking almost an
ounce. Both times she threw it up. Barbara and Hugh had even less luck.

     Before dawn following her birthday Hugh was awakened by Grace
screaming. The child had choked to death.

     During the long day in which three of them battled to save the
baby, Duke and Joe dug a grave, high up the hill in a sunny spot. They
dug deep and stocked a pile of boulders; both held concealed horror that
a bear or coyotes might dig up the grave.

     Grave dug, boulders waiting, Joe said in a strained voice, "How are
we going to build a casket?"

     Duke sighed and wiped sweat from his eyes. "Joe, we can't."

     "We've got to."

     "Oh, we could cut trees and split them and adz out some
lumber-we've done that when we had to. That kitchen counter. But how
long would it take? Joe, this is hot weather-Karen can't wait!"

     "We've got to tear down something and build out of it. A bed,
maybe. Bookcases."

     "Taking the wardrobe apart would be easiest."

     "Let's start."

     "Joe. The 'only things we could use to build a coffin are in the
house. Do you think Hugh will let us go in there now and start ripping
and tearing and banging? If anybody woke that baby or startled it when
they were trying to get it to feed, Dad would kill him. If Barbara or
Mother didn't kill him first. No, Joe. No coffin."

     They settled for a vault, using all their stock of bricks; these
they used to build a box in the bottom of the grave, then cut down their
dining canopy to line it, and cut timbers to cover it. Poor as it was,
they felt comforted by it.

     Next morning the grave received mother and daughter.

     Joe and Duke placed them in it, Duke having insisted that his
father stay behind and take care of Grace and Barbara. Duke had
visualized how awkward it would be, getting the bodies into the grave
and arranging them; he would not have had Joe along had not an assistant
been necessary. He suggested that his mother not come 'to the grave at all.

     Hugh shook his head. "I thought of that. You try to convince her. I
can't budge her."

     Nor could Duke. But when he sent Joe down for the others, his
sister and her daughter were decently at rest with their winding sheet
neatly arranged, and no trace remained of the struggle it had been to
place 'them there, the rebuilding of part of the brick box that had been
necessary, or-worst-the moment when the tiny corpse had fallen out of
the sheet when they tried to get them both down as one. Karen's face
looked peaceful and her daughter was cuddled in her arm as if sleeping.

     Duke balanced with a foot on each brick wall, knelt over her.
"Good-bye, Sis," he whispered. "I'm sorry." He covered her face and got
carefully out of the grave. A little procession was coming up the hill,
Hugh 'assisting his wife, Joe helping Barbara. Beyond the shelter 'their
flag flew at half-mast.

     They arranged themselves at the grave, Hugh at the head, his wife
on his right, his son on his left, Barbara and Joe at the foot. To
Duke's relief no one asked that faces be uncovered nor did his mother
seem disturbed at the arrangements.

     Hugh took a small black book from his pocket, opened it to a marked
page:

     "'I am the Resurrection and the Life. .

     "'We brought nothing into this world, and it is certain that we can
take nothing out. The Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken-'"

     Grace sobbed and her knees started to fail Hugh shoved the book
into Duke's hands, moved to support his wife. "Take over, Son!"

     "Take her back down, Dad!"

     Grace said brokenly, "No, no! I must stay."

     "Read it, Duke. I've marked the passages."

     "'. . . he heapeth up riches, and cannot tell who shall gather them.

     "'For I am a stranger with thee, and a sojourner, as all my fathers
were.

     "'0 spare me a little, that I may recover my strength.

     "'Man, that is born of woman, hath but a short time to live, and is
full of misery.

     "'Unto Almighty God we commend the soul of our sister- of our
sisters-and we commit their bodies to the ground; earth to earth, ashes
to ashes, dust to dust-'"

     Duke paused, dropped the tiniest of clods into the grave. He looked
back at the book, closed it and said suddenly, "Let us pray."

     They took Grace back and put her to bed; Joe and Duke returned to
close the grave. Hugh, seeing that his wife appeared to be resting,
started to snuff candles in the rear bay. She opened her eyes. "Hubert-"

     "Yes, Grace?"

     "I told you. I warned you. You wouldn't listen to me."

     "About what, Grace?"

     "I told you she had to have a doctor! You wouldn't call one. You
were too proud. You sacrificed my daughter on the altar of your pride.
My baby. You killed her."

     "Grace, there are no doctors here. You know that."

     "If you were even half a man, you wouldn't make excuses!"

     "Grace, please. May I get you something? A Miltown? Or would you
like a hypo?"

     "No, no!" she said shrilly. "That's how you tricked me when I was
going to get a doctor anyway. In spite of you. You'll never again trick
me with your drugs. And you'll never touch me again, either. Murderer."

     "Yes, Grace." He turned and left.

     Barbara was on the stoop, sitting with her head in her hands. Hugh
said, "Barbara, the flag must be two-blocked. Do you want me to do it?"

     "So soon, Hugh?"

     "Yes. We go on."

     

 

 

Chapter 10

 

 

     They went on. Duke hunted, Duke and Joe farmed, Hugh worked harder
than ever. Grace worked too, and her cooking improved-and her eating;
she got fatter. She never mentioned her conviction that her husband had
been responsible for the death of their daughter.

     She did not speak to him at all. When a problem had to be discussed
she spoke to Duke. She quit attending church services.

     In the last month of Barbara's pregnancy, Duke sought out his
father privately. "Dad, you told me that any time I wanted to leave-or
any of us-we could."

     Hugh was startled. "Yes."

     "A pro-rata share, you said. Ammo, tools, and so forth."

     "Better than that; we're a going concern. Duke, you are leaving?"

     "Yes-but not just myself. Mother wants to. She's the one who's dead
set on it. I've got reasons, but Mother's wishes are the deciding factor."

     "Mmm- Let's talk about your reasons. Are you dissatisfied with the
way I'm running things? I will gladly step aside. I feel sure that I can
get Joe and Barbara to go along, so that you will have unanimous
support." He sighed. "I am anxious to turn over the burden."

     Duke shook his head. "That's not it, Dad. I don't want to be boss
and you've done a good job. Oh, I won't say I liked the high-handed way
you started in. But results count and you got results. I'd rather not
discuss my reasons except to say that they don't have to do with you-and
wouldn't be enough to make me leave if Mother weren't hipped on it. She
wants to leave. She's going to leave. I can't let her leave alone."

     "Can you tell me why Grace wants to leave?"

     Duke hesitated. "Dad, I don't see that it matters; she's made up
her mind. I pointed out that I couldn't make things as safe for her-nor
as comfortable-as it is here. But she's adamant."

     Hugh pondered it. "Duke, if that's how your mother feels, I won't
try to persuade her; I've long since lost my influence over her. But I
have two ideas. You may find one of them practical."

     "I doubt it."

     "Hear me. You know we have copper tubing; we used some in the
kitchen. We have everything for a still; I stocked the items to build
one if a war came along-not just for us but because liquor is money in
any primitive society.

     "I haven't built it for reasons we both know. But I could and I
know how to make liquor." He smiled slightly. "Not book knowledge. While
I was in the South Pacific, I bossed a still, with the shut-eye
connivance of my C.O. I learned how to turn corn or potatoes or most
anything into vodka, or fruit into brandy. Duke, your mother might be
happy if she had liquor.

     "She would drink herself to death!"

     "Duke, Duke! If she is happy doing it, who are we to stop her? What
does she have to live for? She loved television, she enjoyed parties,
she could spend a happy day at the hairdresser's, followed by a movie,
then drinks with one of her friends. That was her life, Duke. Now where
is it? Gone, gone! There is just this we can give her to make up for
what she has lost. Who are you to decided that you mother must not drink
herself to death?"

     "Dad, that's not the situation!"

     "So?"

     "You know I don't-didn't-approve of Mother's excessive drinking.
But I might go along with letting her drink all she wants now. If you
build that still, we might be customers. But we would still leave.
Because that won't solve Mother's problem."

     "Well, Duke, that leaves only my other idea. I'll get out instead.
Only-" Hugh frowned. "Duke, tell her that I will leave as soon as
Barbara has her baby. I can't walk out on my patient. You can give Grace
my assur-"

     "Dad, that won't solve a thing!"

     "I don't understand."

     "Oh, Christ, I might as well spill it. It's Barbara. She's- Well,
hell, Mother is nuts on the subject. Can't stand her. Ever since Karen
died. She said to me, 'Duke, that woman is not going to have her child
in my home! Her bastard. I won't have it. You tell your father that he
has got to get her out of here.' That's what she said, Dad."

     "Good Lord!"

     "Yeah. I tried to reason with her. I told her that Barbara couldn't
leave. I gave her both barrels, Dad; I said there wasn't a chance that
you would ever force Barbara to leave. But as for making her leave now,
or even letting her, you would no more do it than you would have driven
Karen out. I told her that I wouldn't, either, and that Joe and I would
fight you to stop it, stipulating that you were crazy enough to try.
Which you aren't, of course."

     "Thank you."

     "That did it. She believes me when I lay it on the line. So she
decided to leave. I can't stall her any longer. She's leaving. I'm going
with her, to take care of her."

     His father rubbed his temples. "I guess there is no situation so
bad but what it can get worse. Duke, even with you, she hasn't 'anywhere
to go."

     "Not quite, Dad."

     "Eh?"

     "I can swing it, with your help. Do you remember that cave up
Collins Canyon, the one they tried to make a tourist attraction? It's
still there. Or its twin, I mean. I was hunting up that way that first
week. The canyon looked so familiar that I climbed up and looked for the
cave. Found it. And Dad, it's habitable and defensible."

     "The door? The mouth?"

     "No problem. If you can spare that steel plate that blocked off the
tunnel."

     "Certainly."

     "The cave has a vent, higher up. No smoke problem. It has a spring
that hasn't failed all this dry weather. Dad, it's as comfortable as the
shelter; all it needs is outfitting."

     "I capitulate. You can take almost anything now. Beds, of course.
Utensils. Your pick of the canned goods. Matches, ammunition, guns. Make
a list, I'll help you move."

     Duke colored under his tan. "Dad, a few things are up there already."

     "So? Did you think I would be pinchpenny?"

     "Uh . . . I don't mean the past few days. I moved some things up
the first days we were here. You see . . . well, you and I had that
row-and then you made me rationing officer. That gave me the idea, and
for a week or more I always left here loaded, leaving when no one was
watching."

     "Stealing."

     "I didn't figure it so. I never took as much 'as one-sixth of
anything . . . and just stuff I would have to have in a pinch. Matches.
Ammo. That rifle you couldn't find. One blanket. A knife. A little food.
Some candles. You see. . . well, look at it from my side. There was
always the chance that I would get you sore and either have to fight-one
of us killed is the way you put it-or run and not be able to stop for
anything. I decided not to fight. So I made preparations. But I didn't
steal it; you said I could have it. Say the word and I'll fetch it all
back."

     Hugh Farnham peeled a callus, then looked up. "One man's stealing
is another man's survival, I suppose. Just one thing- Duke, in that food
you took: Were there any cans of milk?"

     "Not one. Dad, don't you think, if there had been, I would have
beaten all records getting up there and back when Karen died?"

     "Yes. I'm sorry I asked."

     "I was sorry I hadn't snitched a few cans; then they wouldn't have
been used up."

     "The baby didn't last out the milk we had, Duke. All right, it
calls for quick surgery-but don't forget that you can come back, any
time. Duke, women sometimes get unreasonable at about your mother's age
. . . then get over it and are nice old ladies. Maybe we'll have the
family together again. I hope we'll see you occasionally. You're~
welcome to all the vegetables you can eat, of course."

     "I was going to mention that. I can't farm up there. Suppose I
still hunt for all of us.. . and when I bring in a load of meat I take
away a load of green stuff?"

     His father smiled. "We have reinstituted commerce. And we can
supply you with pottery and there's no need to do your own tanning.
Duke, I suggest you sort out what you want, and tomorrow you and I and
Joe will start packing it to your cave. Be lavish. Just one thing-"

     "What?"

     "The books are mine! Anything you want to look up, you'll have to
come here. This is not a circulating library."

     "Fair enough."

     "I mean it. You can have my razor, you can have my best knife. But
snitch one book and I'll skin you alive and bind that book in human
skin. There are limits. All right, I'll tell Joe, and get Barbara out of
the house and we'll stay away until dark. Good luck, and tell Grace no
hard feelings. There are, but tell her that. But I'm not too groused. It
takes two to create a heaven . . . but hell can be accomplished by one.
I can't say that I've been happy lately and Grace may be smarter than we
think."

     "That's a polite way of telling us to go to hell, Dad."

     "Possibly."

     "Whatever you mean, the same to you. It was no accident that I
moved away from home as soon as I could."

     "Touché! Well, get on with it." His father turned and walked away.

     Joe made no comment. He simply said that he had better get on with
the irrigating. Barbara said nothing until they were alone.

     Hugh took a picnic lunch-chunks of corn pone, some strings of
jerky, two tomatoes, plus a canteen of water. He fetched a rifle and a
blanket. They went up the hill above the grave and picked the shade of a
detached tree. Hugh noticed fresh flowers on the grave and wondered if
Barbara had been trudging up there. The climb was difficult for her;
they had taken it very slowly. Or had Grace been doing it? It seemed
still less likely. Then he thought of the obvious: Joe.

     Once Barbara had her heavy body comfortable, on her back with knees
up, Hugh said, "Well?"

     She was silent a long time. "Hugh, I'm dreadfully sorry. It's my
fault. Isn't it?"

     "Your fault? Because a woman sick in her mind fixes on you to hate?
You told me once not to blame myself for another person's defect. You
should take your own advice."

     "That wasn't what I meant, Hugh. I mean: losing your son. Grace
could not leave if Duke did not. Did he say anything? About me?"

     "Nothing but this ridiculous set that Grace has taken. What should
he have said?"

     "I wonder if I am free to say? In any case I am going to. Hugh,
after Karen died, Duke asked me to marry him. I refused. He was hurt.
And surprised. You see- You knew about Karen and Joe?"

     "Yes."

     "I didn't know whether Karen had told you. When she decided to
marry Joe, I made up my mind that I would have to marry Duke. Karen took
it for granted and I admitted that I intended to. She may have told
Duke. In any case, he expected me to say Yes. I said No. And he was
hurt. I'm sorry, Hugh. If you want me to, I'll tell him I've changed my
mind."

     "Hold on! I think you made a mistake. But I won't have you
correcting it to please me. What do you want to do? Do you plan to marry
Joe, now?"

     "Joe? I never planned to marry Joe. Although I would marry him as
readily as Duke. Hugh, I want to do what I always want to do. Whatever
you want." She turned on her side and faced him. "You know that. If you
want me to marry Joe, I will. If you want me to marry Duke, I will. You
say it, I'll do it."

     "Barbara, Barbara!"

     "I mean it, Hugh. Or anything more, or anything less. You're my
boss. Not just some, but all. Haven't I done so, all the time we've been
together? I play by the book."

     "Stop talking nonsense."

     "If it's nonsense, it's true nonsense."

     "As may be. I want you to marry whom you want to marry."

     "That's the one thing I can't do. You are already married."

     "Huh?"

     "Are you surprised? No, I've surprised you only by saying it-when
we've kept silent so long. That's how it is and that's how it's always
been. Since I can't marry you, I'll marry whom you say. Or never marry."

     "Barbara, will you marry me?"

     "What did you say?"

     "Will you marry me?"

     "Yes."

     He leaned over and kissed her. She kissed him back, lips open, full
surrender.

     Presently he straightened up. "Would you like some corn pone?"

     "Not yet."

     "I thought we might have some to celebrate. It calls for champagne.
But corn pone is what we have."

     "Oh. Then I'll have a nibble. And a sip of water. Hugh, Hugh my
beloved, what are you going to do about Grace?"

     "Nothing. She's divorcing me. In fact she divorced me more than a
month ago, the day-the day we buried Karen. That she is still here is
just housing shortage. It doesn't take a judge to grant a divorce here,
any more than it will take a license for me to marry you."

     Barbara spread her hands over her swollen belly. "I have my
marriage license, right here!" Her voice was light and happy.

     "The child is mine?"

     She looked at him. "Look over to the east."

     "At what?"

     "Do you see Three Wise Men approaching?"

     "Oh. Idiot!"

     "It is yours, my beloved. A thing a woman can never prove but can
be utterly sure of."

     He kissed her again. When he stopped she caressed his cheek. "I'd
like corn pone now, lots of it. I'm hungry. I feel very full of life and
anxious to live."

     "Yes! Tomorrow our honeymoon starts."

     "Today. It has started, Hugh. I'm going to enter it in our journal.
Darling, may I sleep on the roof tonight? I can manage the ladder."

     "You want to sleep with me? Lecherous little girl!"

     "That wasn't what I meant. I'm not lecherous now, my hormones are
all keyed against it. No passion, dear. Just love. I won't be any good
for a honeymoon. Oh, I'll happily sleep with you; you could have slept
with me all these months. No, dear, I meant that I don't want to sleep
in the same room with Grace. I'm afraid of her-afraid for the baby at
least. Perhaps that's silly."

     "No, it's not. It may not be necessary but it's a precaution we'll
take. Barbara, what do you think of Grace?"

     "Must I say?"

     "Tell me."

     "I don't like her. That's apart from being afraid of her; I didn't
like her long before I became uneasy about her. I don't like the way she
treats me, I don't like the way she treats Joseph, I didn't like the way
she treated Karen, I have always resented the way she treats you-and had
to pretend not to see it-and I despise what she has done to Duke."

     "I don't like her, either-not for years. I'm glad she's leaving.
Barbara, I would be glad even if you were not here."

     "Hugh, I'm relieved to hear that. You know I'm divorced."

     "Yes."

     "When my marriage broke up I swore a solemn oath that I would never
break up anyone else's marriage. I've felt guilty ever since the night
of the attack."

     He shook his head. "Forget it. The marriage was already long dead.
All that was left were duties and obligations. Mine, for she didn't feel
any. Beloved, had my marriage been a reality, you could have come into
my arms that night, and cuddle and comfort would have been 'all. As it
was, we were dying-so we thought-and I was at least as hungry for love
as you were. I was parched for love-you gave me yourself."

     "Beloved, I will never let you be parched again."

 

     About nine the next morning, 'they all were outside where chattels
for the new household were piled.

     Hugh looked over 'his ex-wife's selections with wry amusement.
Grace had taken literally the invitation to "take almost anything"; she
had gutted the place-the best blankets, almost all utensils including
the teakettle and the one skillet, three of four foam-rubber mattresses,
nearly all the remaining canned goods, all the sugar, the lion's share
of other irreplaceables, all the plastic dishes.

     Hugh made only one objection: salt. When he noted that Grace had
grabbed all the salt he insisted on a division. Duke agreed and asked if
there was anything else Hugh objected to?

     Hugh shook his head. Barbara would not mind making-do. "Better is a
dinner of herbs where love is-"

     Duke had shown restraint, taking one shovel, one ax, a hammer, less
than half the nails, and no tool not stocked in duplicate. Instead, Duke
remarked that he might want to borrow tools someday. Hugh agreed and
offered his services on any two-man job. Duke thanked him. Both men
found the situation embarrassing, both covered it by being unusually polite.

     A delay in starting was caused by the steel plate for the cave
door. Its weight was not too great for a man as husky as Duke, but it
was awkward. A pack had to be devised, rugged enough for the trek,
comfortable in padding and straps, and so rigged that Duke could fire a
rifle.

     This resulted in sacrificing the one intact bear hide, the covering
of the bed Karen had died in. Hugh minded only the loss of time. It
would take six trips by three men to move the plunder Grace had picked;
Duke thought that two trips a day would be maximum. If they did not
start soon, only one trip could be made that day.

     At last they got it on Duke's back with a fur pad protecting his
spine. "Feels right," Duke decided. "Let's get packs on you two and get
going."

     "In a jiffy," Hugh agreed and bent over to pick up his load.

     "My God!"

     "Trouble, Duke?"

     "Look!"

     A shape had appeared over the eastern rise. It slanted through the
air on a course that would have missed them, but, as it neared the point
of closest approach, it stopped dead, turned and headed for them.

     It passed majestically overhead. Hugh was unable to guess its size
at first; there was nothing to which to relate it-a dark shape
proportioned like a domino tile. But as it passed about five hundred
feet up, it seemed to him that it was around a hundred feet wide and
three times that in length. He could make out no features. It moved
swiftly but made no noise.

     It swept past, turned, circled-stopped, turned again and came
toward them at lower altitude.

     Hugh found that he had an arm around Barbara. When the object had
appeared, she had been some distance away, putting clothes to soak in
the outside tub. Now she was circled by his left arm and he could feel
her trembling.

     "Hugh, what is it?"

     "People."

     The thing hovered above their flag. Now they could see people;
heads showed above its sides.

     A corner detached itself, splitting off sharply. It dove, stopped
by the peak of the flagpole. Hugh saw that it was a car about nine feet
long and three wide, with one passenger. No details could he see, no
clue to motive power; the car enclosed the man's lower body; his trunk
projected above.

     The man removed the flag, rejoined the main craft. His vehicle
blended back in.

     The rectangle disintegrated.

     It broke into units like that which had filched their flag. Most
cars remained in the air; some dozen landed, three in a triangle around
the colonists. Duke yelled "Watch it!" and dived for his gun.

     He never made it. He leaned forward at an extreme angle, pawed the
air with a look of amazement, and was slowly pulled back to vertical.

     Barbara gasped in Hugh's ear. "Hugh, what is it?"

     "I don't know." He did not need to ask what she meant; he had felt,
at the instant his son was stopped, that he seemed to be waist deep in
quicksand. "Don't fight it."

     "I wasn't going to."

     Grace shrilled, "Hubert! Hubert, do some-" Her cries cut off. She
seemed to faint but did not fall.

     Four cars were about eight feet in the air, lined up abreast, and
were cruising over Barbara's farm. Where they passed, everything
underneath, cornstalks, tomato plants, beans, squash, lettuce, potato
hills, everything including branching ditches was pressed flat into a
macadam.

     The raw end of the main ditch spilled water over this pavement. One
car whipped around, ran a new ditch around the raped area in a wide
sweep which allowed the water to circle the destroyed garden and reach
the stream at a lower point.

     Barbara buried her face against Hugh. He patted her.

     That car then went upstream along the old ditch. Soon water ceased
to flow.

     As the garden was leveled, other cars landed on it. Hugh was
'unable to figure out what they did, but a large pavilion, glossy black,
and ornate in red and gold, grew up in seconds in the clearing.

     Duke called out, "Dad! For God's sake, can't you get at your gun?"

     Hugh was wearing a forty-five, the weapon he had picked for the
hike. His hands were only slightly hampered by whatever held them. But
he answered, "I shan't try."

     "Are you going to just stand there and let-"

     "Yes. Duke, use your head. If we hold still, we may live longer."

     Out of the pavilion strode a man. He seemed seven feet tall but
some of this was a helmet, plumed and burnished. He wore a flowing skirt
of red embroidered in gold and was bare to the waist save that an end of
the skirt thrown across one shoulder covered part of his broad chest. He
was shod in black boots.

     All others were dressed in black coveralls with a red and gold
patch at the right shoulder. Hugh felt an impression that this man
(there was no slightest doubt that he was master)-that the commander had
taken time to change into formal clothes. Hugh felt encouraged. They
were prisoners-but if the leader took the trouble to dress up before
interviewing them, then they were prisoners of importance and a parley
might be fruitful. Or did that follow?

     But he was encouraged by the man's face, too. He had an air of
good-natured arrogance and his eyes were bright and merry. His forehead
was high, his skull massive; he looked intelligent and alert. Hugh could
not place his race. His skin was dark brown and shiny. But his mouth was
only slightly Negroid; his nose, though broad, was arched, and his black
hair was wavy.

     He carried a small crop.

     He strode up to them, stopped abruptly when he reached Joseph. He
gave a curt order to their nearest captor.

     Joe stretched and bent his legs. "Thanks."

     The man spoke to Joe. Joe answered, "Sorry, I don't understand."

     The man spoke again. Joe shrugged helplessly. The man grinned and
patted him on the shoulder, turned away, picked up Duke's rifle. He
handled it clumsily, making Hugh flinch.

     Nevertheless, he seemed to understand guns. He worked the bolt,
ejecting one cartridge, then put it to his shoulder, aimed upstream and
fired.

     The blast was deafening, he had fired past Hugh's ear. He grinned
broadly, tossed the rifle to a subordinate, walked up to Hugh and
Barbara, reached out to touch Barbara's child swollen belly.

     Hugh knocked his hand away.

     With a gesture almost negligent, certainly without anger, the big
man brushed Hugh's hand aside with the crop he carried. It was not a
blow, it would not have swatted a fly.

     Hugh gasped in agony. His hand burned like fire and his arm was
numb to the armpit. "Oh, God!"

     Barbara said urgently, "Don't, Hugh. He isn't hurting me."

     Nor was he. With a manner of impersonal interest such as a
veterinarian might take in feeling a pregnant mare or bitch, the big man
felt out the shape of the child she carried, then lifted one of her
breasts-while Hugh writhed in that special humiliation of a man unable
to protect his woman.

     The man finished his palpation, grinned at Barbara and patted her
head. Hugh tried to ignore the pain in his hand and dug into his memory
for a language imperfectly learned. "Vooi govoriti'yeh po-Russki, Gospodin?"

     The man glanced at him, made no answer.

     Barbara said, "Sprechen Sie deutsch, mein Herr?"

     That got her a smile. Hugh called out, "Duke, try him in Spanish!"

     "Okay. ~Habla usted Español, Señor?" No response- Hugh sighed.
"We've shot our wad."

     "M'sieur?" Joe said. "Est-ce que vous parlez la langue française?"

     The man turned. "Tiens?"

     "Parlez-vous francais, monsieur?"

     "Mais oui! Vous êtes françaises?"

     "Non, non! Je suis américain. Nous sommes tous amencams."

     "Vraiment? Impossible!"

     "C'est vrai, monsieur. Je vous en assure." Joe pointed to the empty
flagpole. "Les Etats-Unis de l'Amérique."

     The conversation became hard to follow as both sides stumbled along
in broken French. At last they paused and Joe said, "Hugh, he asked
me-ordered me-to come into his tent and talk. I've asked him to let you
all loose first. He says No. 'Hell, no!' it amounts to."

     "Ask him to let the women loose."

     "I'll try." Joe spoke at length with the big man. "He says the
enceinte femme-that's Barbara-can sit down where she is. The 'fat
one'-Grace he means-is to come with us."

     "Good work, Joe. Get us a deal."

     "I'll try. I don't understand him very well."

     The three went into the pavilion. Barbara found that she could sit
down, even stretch out. But the invisible web held Hugh as clingingly as
ever.

     "Dad," Duke said urgently, "this is our chance, while nobody is
around who understands English."

     "Duke," Hugh answered wearily, "can't you see they hold trumps?
It's my guess that we are alive as long as he isn't annoyed-not one
minute longer."

     "Aren't you even going to try to fight? Where's that crap you used
to spout about how you were a free man and planned to stay free?"

     Hugh rubbed his hurt hand. "Duke, I won't argue. You start anything
and you'll get us killed. That's how I size it up."

     "So it was just crap," Duke said scornfully. "Well, I'm not making
any promises."

     "All right. Drop it."

     "I'm not making promises. Just tell me this, Dad. How does it feel
to be shoved around? Instead of shoving?"

     "I don't like it."

     "Neither did I. I've never forgotten it. I hope you get your bellyful."

     Barbara said, "Duke, for heaven's sake, stop talking like a fool!"

     Duke looked at her. "I'll shut up. Just one thing. Where did you
get that baby in you?"

     Barbara did not answer. Hugh said quietly, "Duke, if we get out of
this, I promise you a beating."

     "Any time, old man."

     They quit talking. Barbara reached out and patted Hugh's ankle.
Five men gathered around the pile of household objects, looking them
over. A man came up and gave them an order; they dispersed. He looked at
the chattels himself, then peered into the shelter and went inside.

     Hugh heard a sound of water, saw a brown wave rushing down the
stream bed. Barbara raised her head. "What's that?"

     "Our dam is gone. It doesn't matter."

     After a long time, Joe came out of the pavilion alone. He came up
to Hugh and said, "Well, here's the scoop, as nearly as I got it. Not
too near, maybe; he speaks a patois and neither of us is fluent. But
here it is. We're trespassers, this is private land. He figured we were
escaped prisoners-the word is something else, not French, but that's the
idea. I've convinced him-I think I have-that we are innocent people here
through no fault of our own.

     "Anyhow, he's not sore, even though we are technically
criminals-trespass, and planting things where farms aren't supposed to
be and building a dam and a house and things like that. I think
everything is going to be all right-as long as we do as we're told. He
finds us interesting-how we got here and so forth."

     Joe looked at Barbara. "You remember your theory about parallel
universes?"

     "I guess I was right. No?"

     "No. This part is as confused as can be. But one thing is certain.
Barbara, Hugh-Duke-get this! This is our own world, right here."

     Duke said, "Joe, that's preposterous."

     "You argue with him. He knows what I mean by the United States, he
knows where France is. And so forth. No question about it."

     "Well. . ." Duke paused. "As may be. But what about this? Where's
my mother? What's the idea of leaving her with that savage?"

     "She's all right, she's having lunch with him. And enjoying it. Let
it run easy, Duke, and we're going to be okay, I think. Soon as they
finish lunch we'll be leaving."

     Somewhat later Hugh helped Barbara into one of the odd flying
machines, then mounted into one himself, behind the pilot. He found the
seat comfortable and, in place of a safety belt, a field of that
quicksand enclosed his lower body as he sat down. His pilot, a young
Negro who looked remarkably like Joe, glanced back, then took off
without noise or fuss and joined the re-forming rectangle in the air.
Hugh saw that perhaps half the cars had passengers; they were whites,
the pilots were invariably colored, ranging from as light brown as a
Javanese to as sooty black as a Fiji Islander.

     The car Hugh was in was halfway back in the outside starboard file.
He looked around for the others and was only mildly surprised to see
Grace riding behind the boss, in the front rank, center position. Joe
was behind them, rather buried in cats.

     Off to his right, two cars had not joined up. One hovered over the
pile of household goods, gathered them up in a nonexistent cargo net,
moved away. The second car was over the shelter.

     The massive block lifted straight up without disturbing the shack
on its roof. The small car and its giant burden took position fifty feet
off the starboard side. The formation moved forward and gathered speed
but Hugh felt no wind of motion. The car flanking them seemed to have no
trouble keeping up. Hugh could not see the other loaded car but assumed
that it was on the port side.

     The last he saw of their home was a scar where the shelter had
rested, a larger scar where Barbara's farm had been, and a meandering
track that used to mark an irrigation ditch.

     He rubbed his sore hand, reflecting that the whole thing had been a
gross abuse of coincidence. It offended him the way thirteen spades in a
putatively honest deal would offend him. He pondered a remark Joe had
made before they loaded: "We were incredibly lucky to have encountered a
scholar. French is a dead language-'une langue perdue,' he called it."

     Hugh craned his neck, caught Barbara's eye. She smiled.

 

 

 

Chapter 11

 

 

 

     Memtok, Chief Palace Domestic to the Lord Protector of the Noonday
Region, was busy and happy-happy because he was busy, although he was
not aware that he was happy and was given to complaining about how hard
he had to work, because, as he put it, although he commanded eighteen
hundred servants there were not three who could be trusted to empty a
slop jar without supervision.

     He had just completed a pleasant interview chewing out the head
chef; he had suggested that the chef himself, old and tough as he was,
nevertheless would make a better roast than the meat the chef had sent
in to Their Charity the evening before. One of the duties that Memtok
assumed personally was always to sample what his lord ate, despite risk
of poison and despite the fact that Their Charity's tastes in cuisine
were not his own. It was one of the innumerable ways in which Memtok
gave attention to details, diligence that had brought him, still in his
prime, to his present supreme eminence.

     The head chef had grumbled and Memtok had sent him away with a
taste of the lesser whip to remind him that cooks were not that hard to
find. Then he had turned happily to his paper work.

     There were stacks of it, as he had just completed moving the
household from the Palace to the Summer Palace-thirty-eight of the
Chosen but only four hundred and sixty-three servants; the summer
residence was run with a skeleton staff. The twice-yearly move involved
a wash of paper work-purchase orders, musters, inventories, vouchers,
shipping lists, revisions of duty rosters, dispatches-and he considered
advising his patron to have some likely youngster muted and trained as
his clerk. But he rejected the idea; Memtok did not trust servants who
could read and write and add, it gave them ideas even if they could not
talk.

     The truth was, Memtok loved his paper work and did not want to
share it. His hands flew over the papers, checking figures, signing his
symbol, okaying payments. He held his pen in an odd fashion, nested
between the first three fingers of his right hand-this because he had no
thumbs.

     He did not miss them, could barely remember what it had been like
to have them. Nor did he need them. He could handle a spoon, a pen, and
a whip without them, and he had no need ever to handle anything else.

     Far from missing his thumbs, he was proud of their absence; they
proved that he had served his lord in both major capacities, at stud
when he was younger and now these many years as a tempered domestic.
Every male servant over fourteen (with scarce special exceptions) showed
one alteration or the other; very few could exhibit both, only a few
hundred on the entire Earth. Those few spoke as equals only to each
other, they were an elite.

     Someone scratched at the door. "Come!" he called out, then growled,
"What do you want?" The growl was automatic but he really did dislike
this servant for the best of reasons; he was not subject to Memtok's
discipline. He was of a different caste, huntsmen, wardens, keepers, and
beaters, and was subject to the Majordomo of the Preserve. The Majordomo
considered himself to be of the same rank as the Chief Domestic, and
nominally was. However, he had thumb.

     Memtok's greatest objection to the Summer Palace was that it put
him in contact with these servants who had the unpardonable fault of not
being under his orders. While it would take only a word to Their Charity
to crack down on one of them, he disliked to ask, and while he could
touch one of them without real fear of reprimand, the louse would be
sure to complain to his boss. Memtok did not believe in friction between
executive servants. Bad for morale.

     "Message from Boss. Rayed to tell you Their Charity on his way
back. Says four savages with escort. Says you better tear up to the
roof, take care of them. All."

     "'All'? Damn you, what do you mean 'All'? Why four savages? And in
the Name of Uncle when are they arriving?"

     "All," the servant insisted. "Message came in twenty minutes ago. I
been looking all over for you."

     "Get out!" The important part of the message was that Their Charity
was arriving home instead of staying away overnight. Chef, Receptionist,
Musical Director, Housekeeper, Groundskeeper, all heads of
departments-he was phoning orders even as he thought. Four savages? Who
cared about savages?

     But he was on the roof and accepted their custody. He would have
been there anyway, with the Lord Protector arriving.

 

     When they arrived, Hugh had no chance to see Barbara. When he was
released from the restraint of the "seat belt," he was confronted by a
little baldheaded white man with a waspish face, an abrupt manner, and a
whip. He was dressed in a white robe which reminded Hugh of a
nightshirt, save that it had on the right shoulder the red and gold
patch which Hugh had tentatively identified as the insigne of the big
man, the boss. The emblem was repeated in rubies and gold on the chest
of the little man as a medallion supported by a heavy gold chain.

     The man looked him over with obvious, distaste, then turned him and
Duke over to another white man in a nightshirt. This man wore no
medallion but did carry a small whip. Hugh rubbed his hand and resolved
not to test whether this whip was as potent as the ornate one carried by
the big boss.

     Duke tested it. The angry little man gave instructions to his straw
boss, and left. The straw boss gave an order; Hugh interpreted the tone
and gesture as: "All right, you guys, get going"-and got going.

     Duke didn't. The straw boss barely touched him on his calf; Duke
yelped. He limped the rest of the way-down a ramp, into a very fast
lift, then into a windowless, light, white-walled room which whiffed of
hospitals.

     Duke understood the order to strip without needing to be
stimulated; he cursed but complied. Hugh merely complied. He was
beginning to understand the system. The whips were used as spurs are
used by a good rider, to exact prompt obedience but not to damage.

     From there they were herded into a smaller room, where they were
hit from all sides by streams of water. The operator was in a gallery
above. He shouted at them, then indicated in pantomime that they were to
scrub.

     They scrubbed. The jets cut off, they were doused in liquid soap.
They scrubbed again and were rinsed and were required to scrub still
again, all to gestures that left no doubt as to how thorough a bath was
expected. The jets got very hot and harsh, changed to cold and still
harsher, were replaced by blasts of hot air.

     It was too much like an automatic dishwasher, Hugh' felt, but they
ended up cleaner than they had been in months. An assistant to the bath
master then plastered strips over their eyebrows, rubbed an emulsion on
their scalps, into their scratchy beards (neither had shaved that day),
over their backs and chests and arms and legs, and finally into their
pubic hair. Duke got another lesson in obedience before he submitted to
this last. When, thereafter, they were subjected willy-nilly to enemas,
he gritted his teeth and took it. The water closet was a whirlpool set
in the floor. Their finger- and toenails were cut short.

     After that they were bathed again. The eyebrow patches washed away.
So did their hair. When they came out, they were both bald all over,
save for eyebrows.

     The bath master made them gargle, showing them what he wanted and
spitting into the whirlpool. They gargled three times-a pleasant,
pungent liquid-and when it was over, Hugh found that his teeth seemed
cleaner than they had ever been in his life. He felt utterly clean,
lively, glowing with well being-but humiliated.

     They were taken to another room and examined.

     Their examiner wore the conventional white nightshirt and a small
insigne on a thin gold chain but he needed no diplomas on the wall to
show his profession. His bedside manner would never make him rich, Hugh
decided; he had the air of military surgeons Hugh had known-not unkind
but impersonal.

     He seemed surprised by and interested in a removable bridge he
found in Hugh's mouth. He examined it, looked in Hugh's mouth at the
gaps it had filled, gave it to one of his assistants with instructions.
The assistant went away and Hugh wondered if his chewing was going to be
permanently hampered.

     The physician took an hour or more over each of them, using
instruments Hugh did not recognize-weight, height, and blood pressure
were the only familiar tests. Things were done to them, too, none of
them really unpleasant-no hypodermic needles, no knives. During this,
Hugh's bridge was returned and he was allowed to put it back in.

     But the tests and/or treatments often seemed to be indignities even
though not painful. Once, when Hugh was stretched out on a table from
which Duke had just been released, the younger man said, "How do you
like it, Dad?"

     "Restful."

     Duke snorted.

     The fact that both men had appendicitis scars seemed to interest
the physician as much as the removable bridge. By acting he indicated a
bellyache, then jabbed a thumb into McBurney's point. Hugh conveyed
agreement-with difficulty, as nodding the head seemed to be a negative.

     An assistant came in and handed the physician a contrivance which
turned out to be another dental bridge. Hugh was required to open his
mouth; the old one was again taken and the new one seated. It felt to
Hugh's tongue as if he again had natural teeth there. The physician
probed cavities, cleaned them and filled them-without pain but without
anesthesia so far as Hugh was aware.

     After that Hugh was suddenly "strapped" (an invisible field) to a
table, supine, and his legs were elevated. Another table was wheeled up
and Hugh realized that he was being prepared for surgery-and with horror
he was sure what sort. "Duke! Don't let them grab you! Get that whip!"

     Duke hesitated too long. The therapist did not carry a whip; he
merely kept one at hand. Duke lunged for it, the physician got it first.
Moments later Duke was on his back, still gasping his agony at the
punishment he had taken and having his knees elevated and spread. They
both went on protesting.

     The physician looked at them thoughtfully and the straw boss who
had fetched them was called in. Presently the waspish little man with
the big medallion strode in, looked the situation over, stormed out.

     There was a long wait. The boss therapist filled in the time by
having his assistants complete preparations for surgery and there was no
longer the slightest doubt in Hugh's mind, or Duke's, as to what they
were in for. Duke pointed out that it would have been better if they had
fought-and died-earlier in the day, rather than wind up like this. As
they would have fought, he reminded his father, if Hugh hadn't turned
chicken.

     Hugh didn't argue, he agreed. He tried to tell himself that his
docility in being captured was on account of the women. It afforded him
little comfort. True, he hadn't used his own much in recent years . . .
and might never need them again. But, damn it, he was used to them. And
it would be rough for Duke, young as he was.

     After a long time the little man stormed back in, angrier than
ever. He snapped an order; Hugh and Duke were released.

     That ended it, save that they were rubbed all over with a fragrant
cream. They were given a white nightshirt apiece, conducted through long
bare passages and Hugh was shoved into a cell. The door was not locked
but he could not open it.

     In one corner was a tray, with dishes and a spoon. The food was
excellent and some of it unidentifiable; Hugh ate with good appetite,
scraping the dishes and drinking the thin beer with it. Then he slept on
a soft part of the floor, having blanked his mind of worry.

     He was prodded awake by a foot.

     He was taken to another plain, windowless room, which turned out to
be a schoolroom. Two short white men in nightshirts were there. They
were equipped with props, the equivalent of a blackboard (it could be
cleared instantly by some magic), patience-and a whip, for the lessons
were "taught to the tune of a hickory stick." No error went unnoted.

     They both could draw and both were imaginative pantomimists; Hugh
was taught to speak.

     Hugh discovered that his memory was sharpened by the stimuli of
pain; he had little tendency to repeat a mistake. At first he was
punished only for forgetting vocabulary, but as he learned, he grew to
expect flicks of pain for errors in inflection, construction, idiom, and
accent.

     This Pavlovian treatment continued-if his mental records were
correct-for seventeen days; he did nothing else and saw no one but his
teachers. They worked in shifts; Hugh worked every possible minute,
about sixteen hours a day. He was never allowed quite enough sleep
although he never felt sleepy-he didn't dare-during lessons. Once a day
he was bathed and given a clean nightshirt, twice a day he was fed,
tasty food and plentiful, three times a day he was policed to the
toilet. All other minutes were spent learning to speak, with ever-sharp
awareness that any bobble would be punished.

     But he learned how to duck punishment. A question, quickly put,
would sometimes do. "Teacher, this one understands that there are
protocol modes for each status rising and falling, but what this one in
its ignorance lacks is knowledge of what each status is-being wholly
without experience through the inscrutable ways of Uncle the Mighty-and
also is sometimes not aware of the status assumed for teaching purposes
by my charitable teacher and of the status this humble one is expected
to assume in reply. More than that, this one does not know its own
status in the great family. May it please its teacher."

     The whip was put down and for the next hour he was lectured. The
problem was more involved than Hugh's question showed. The lowest status
was stud. No, there was one lower: servant children. But since children
were expected to make mistakes, it did not matter. Next higher was slut,
then tempered servant-a category with subtle and unlimited gradations of
rank so involved that speech of equals was used if the gradient was not
clearly evident. High above all servants were the Chosen, with unlimited
and sometimes changing variations of rank, including those ritual
circumstances in which a lady takes precedence over a lord. But that was
not usually a worry; always use protocol rising mode. However- "If two
of the Chosen speak to you at once, which one do you answer?"

     "The junior," Hugh answered.

     "Why?"

     "Since the Chosen do not make mistakes, this one's ears were at
fault. The senior did not actually speak, for his junior would never
have interrupted."

     "Correct. You are a tempered gardener and you encounter a Chosen of
the same rank as your lord uncle. He speaks. 'Boy, what sort of a flower
is that?'"

     "As Their Charity knows much better than this one can ever know, if
this one's eyes are not mistaken, that plant may be a hydrangea."

     "Good. But drop your eyes when you say it. Now about your status-"
The teacher looked pained. "You haven't any."

     "Please, teacher?"

     "Uncle! I've tried to find out. Nobody knows but our Lord Uncle and
they have not ruled. You're not a child, you're not a stud, you're not a
tempered, you don't belong anywhere. You're a savage and you don't fit."

     "But what protocol mode must I use?"

     "Always the rising. Oh, not to children. Nor to sluts, no need to
overdo it."

     Except for changes in inflection caused by status, Hugh found the
language simple and logical. It had no irregular verbs and its syntax
was orderly; it probably had been tidied up at some time. He suspected,
from words that he recognized-"simba," "bwana," "wazir," "étage,"
"trek," "oncle"- that it had roots in several African languages. But
that did not matter; this was "Speech" and, according to his teachers,
the only language spoken anywhere.

     In addition to protocol modes, quite a chunk of vocabulary was
double, one word being used down, its synonym although different in root
used up. He had to know both-be able to recognize one and to use the other.

     The pronunciation gave him trouble at first, but by the end of the
week he could lip smack, click, make the fast glottal stop, and hear and
say vowel distinctions he had never suspected existed. By the sixteenth
day he was chattering freely, beginning to think in it, and the whip was
rarely used.

     Late next day the Lord Protector sent for him.

 

 

 

Chapter 12

 

 

 

     Although he had been bathed that day, Hugh was rushed through
another bath, rubbed down with fragrant cream, and issued a fresh robe,
before being whizzed to the lord's private apartments. There he was
bounced past a series of receptionists close on Memtok's heels, and into
a large and very sumptuous retiring room.

     The lord was not there; Joseph and Dr.-Livingstone-I-Presume were.
Joe called out, "Hugh! Wonderful!" and added to the Chief Domestic, "You
may go."

     Memtok hesitated, then backed away and left. Joe ignored him,
slipped his arm in Hugh's, and led him to a divan. "Gosh, it's good to
see you! Sit down, we'll talk until Ponse gets here. You look well."
Doctor Livingstone checked Hugh's ankles, purred and stropped against them.

     "I am well. 'Ponse'?" Hugh scratched the cat's ears.

     "Don't you know his name? The Lord Protector, I mean. No, I guess
you wouldn't. That's one of his names, one he uses en famille. Never
mind, have they been treating you right?"

     "I suppose so."

     "They had better. Ponse gave orders for you to be pampered. Look,
if you aren't treated okay, you tell me. I can fix it."

     Hugh hesitated. "Joe, have you had one of those odd whips used on you?"

     "Me?" Joe seemed astonished. "Of course not. Hugh, have they been
abusing you? Peel off that Mother Hubbard and let me have a look."

     Hugh shook his head. "There are no marks on me. I haven't been
hurt. But I don't like it."

     "But if you've been stroked for no reason- Hugh, that's one thing
that Ponse does not tolerate. He's a very humane sort of guy. All he
wants is discipline. If anybody-anybody at all, even Memtok-has been
cruel to you, somebody is going to catch it."

     Hugh thought about it. He rather liked his teachers. They had
worked hard and patiently and had been sparing of him once it became
possible to talk instead of using the whip. "I haven't been hurt. Just
reminded."

     "I'm glad to hear it. Actually, Hugh, I didn't see how you could
be. That quirt Ponse carries-you could kill a man with it at a thousand
feet; it takes skill to use it gently. But those toys the upper servants
carry, all they do is tingle and that's all they are supposed to do."

     Hugh decided not to argue over what constituted a tingle; he had
urgent things on his mind. "Joe, how are the others? Have you seen them?"

     "Oh, they're all right. You heard about Barbara?"

     "I haven't heard a damn thing! What about Barbara?"

     "Slow down. Having her babies, I mean."

     "She had her baby?"

     "'Babies.' Twin boys, identical. A week ago."

     "How is she? How is she?"

     "Easy, man! She's fine, couldn't be better. Of course. They are way
ahead of us in medicine; losing a mother, or a baby, is unheard of." Joe
suddenly looked sad. "It's a shame they didn't run across us months
back." He brightened. "Barbara told me that she had intended to name it
Karen, if it was a girl. When it turned out to be twin boys, she named
one-the one five minutes the elder-'Hugh' and the other 'Karl Joseph.'
Nice, eh?"

     "I'm flattered. Then you've seen her. Joe, I've got to see her.
Right away. How do I arrange it?"

     Joe looked astonished. "But you can't, Hugh. Surely you know that."

     "Why can't I?"

     "Why, you're not tempered, that's why. Impossible."

     ''Oh.''

     "I'm sorry, but that's the way it is." Joseph suddenly grinned. "I
understand that you were almost made eligible by accident. Ponse laughed
his head off at how close you came and how you and Duke yelped."

     "I don't see the humor of it."

     "Oh, Hugh, he simply has a robust sense of humor. He laughed when
he told me about it. I didn't laugh and he decided that I have no sense
of humor. Different people laugh at different things. Karen used to use
a fake Negro dialect that set my teeth on edge, the times I overheard
it. But she didn't mean any harm. Karen- Well, they just don't come any
better, and you and I know it and I'll shut up about it. Look, if the
vet had gone ahead, without orders, it would have cost him his hands;
Ponse sent that word to him. Might have suspended the sentence-good
surgeons 'are valuable. But his assumption was only natural, Hugh; both
you and Duke are too tall and too big for stud. However, Ponse doesn't
tolerate sloppiness."

     "All right, all right. I still don't see the harm in my calling on
Barbara and seeing her babies. You saw her. And you're not tempered."

     Joe looked patiently exasperated. "Hugh, it's not the same thing.
Surely you know it."

     "Why isn't it?"

     Joe sighed. "Hugh, I didn't make the rules. But I'm Chosen and
you're not, and that's all there is to it. It's not my fault that you're
white."

     "All right. Forget it."

     "Let's be glad that one of us is in a position to get us some
favors. Do you realize that all of you would have been executed? If I
hadn't been along?"

     "The thought has crossed my mind. Lucky you knew French. And that
he knows French."

     Joe shook his head. "French didn't enter into it, it merely saved
time. The point was that I was there . . . and the rest of you were
excused of any responsibility on that account. What had to be settled
then was the degree of my criminality, my neck was in a noose." Joe
frowned. "I'm still not in the clear. I mean, Ponse is convinced but my
case has to be re viewed by the Supreme Lord Proprietor; it's his
preserve- Ponse is just custodian. I could be executed yet."

     "Joe, what in the world is there about it to cause you to talk
about being executed?"

     "Plenty! Look, if you four ofays-whites-had been alone, Ponse would
have tried you just by looking at you. Two capital crimes and both
self-evident. Escapees. Servants who had run away from their lord.
Destructive trespass in a personal domain of the Supreme Proprietor.
Open-and-shut on both counts and death for each of them. Don't tell me
that wasn't the way it was because I know it and it took me long enough
to make Ponse see it, using a language neither one of us knows too well.
And my neck is still in jeopardy. However-" He brightened. "Ponse tells
me that the Supreme Proprietor is years behind in reviewing criminal
cases and that it has been more years since he last set foot on this
preserve or even cruised over it . . . and that long before my case can
come up there won't be a trace of destruction. They are putting the
trees back and there's never an accurate count of bears and deer and
other game. He tells me not to worry."

     "Well, that's good."

     "But maybe you think I haven't done some sweating over it! Just
letting your shadow fall across the Supreme Lord Proprietor means your
neck and sneezing in his presence is even worse-so you can figure for
yourself that trespassing on land that is his personally is nothing to
take lightly. But I shan't worry as long as Ponse says not to. He's been
treating me as a guest, not as a prisoner. But tell me about yourself. I
hear you've been studying the language. So have I-a tutor every day I've
had time for it."

     Hugh answered, "May it meet with their approval, this one's time
has, as they know, been devoted to nothing else."

     "Whoo! You speak it better than I do."

     "I was given incentive," Hugh said, relapsing into English. "Joe,
have you seen Duke? Grace?"

     "Duke, no. I haven't tried to. Ponse has been away most of the time
and took me along; I've been terribly busy. Grace, yes. It's possible
that you might see Grace. She's often in these apartments. That's the
only way you could see her, of course. Right here. And in the presence
of Ponse. Might happen. He's not a stickler for protocol. In private, I
mean; he keeps up appearances in public."

     "Hmm- Joe, in that case, couldn't you ask him to let me see Barbara
and the twins? Here? In his presence?"

     Joe looked exasperated. "Hugh, can't you understand that I'm just a
guest? I'm here on sufferance. I don't have a single servant of my own,
no money, no title. I said you might see Grace; I did not say you would.
If you did, it would be because he had sent for you and it suited him
not to send her out-not for your convenience. As for asking him to let
you see Barbara, I can't. And that's that! I advise you not to, either.
You might learn that his quirt doesn't just tingle."

     "All I meant was-"

     "Watch it! Here he comes."

     Joe went to meet his host. Hugh stood with head bowed, eyes
downcast, and waited to be noticed. Ponse came striding in, dressed much
as Hugh had seen him before save that the helmet was replaced by a red
skullcap. He greeted Joe, sat heavily down on a large divan, stuck out
his legs. Doctor Livingstone jumped up into the lord's lap; he stroked
it. Two female servants appeared from nowhere, pulled off his boots,
wiped his feet with a hot towel, dried them, massaged them, placed
slippers on them, and vanished.

     While this was going on, the Lord Protector spoke to Joe of matters
Hugh could not follow other than as words, but he noticed that the noble
used the mode of equals to Joe and that Joe talked in the same fashion
to him. Hugh decided that Joe must be in as solid as Doctor Livingstone.
Well, Joe did have a pleasing personality.

     At last the big man glanced at him. "Sit down, boy."

     Hugh sat down, on the floor. The lord went on, "Have you learned
Language? We're told that you have."

     "May it please Their Charity, 'this one's time has been devoted
singly to that purpose, with what inadequate resultsknown to them far
better than their servant would dare venture to estimate."

     "Not bad. Accent could be crisper. And you missed an infix. How do
you like the weather we've been having?"

     "Weather is as Uncle the Mighty ordains it. If it pleases His
favorite nephew, it cannot fail to make joyful one so humble as this
servant."

     "Quite good. Accent blurry but understandable. Work on it. Tell
your teachers we said it. Now drop that fancy speech, I haven't time to
listen to it. Equals speech, always. In private, I mean."

     "All right. I-" Hugh broke off; one of the female servants had
returned, to kneel in front of her lord with a drink on a tray.

     Ponse glanced sharply at Hugh, then looked at the girl. "It?
Doesn't count, it's a deaf mute. You were saying?"

     "I was about to say that I couldn't have an opinion about weather
because I haven't seen any since I got here."

     "I suppose not. I gave orders for you to learn Language as quickly
as possible and servants are inclined to follow instructions literally.
No imagination. All right, you will walk outdoors an hour each day. Tell
whoever is in charge of you. Any petition? Are you getting enough to
eat? Are you being treated well?"

     "The food is good, I'm used to eating three times a day but-"

     "You can eat four times a day if you wish. Again, tell the one in
charge of you. All right, now to other matters. Hugh- That's your name,
isn't it?"

     "Yes, Their Charity."

     "Can't you hear? I said, 'Use equals mode.' My private name is
Ponse. Use it. Hugh, if I had not picked you people up myself, were I
not a scholar, and had I not seen with my own eyes the artifacts in that
curious structure, your house, I would not have believed it. As it is, I
must. I'm not a superstitious man. Uncle works in mysterious ways, but
He doesn't use miracles and I would not hesitate to repeat that in any
temple on Earth, unorthodox as it sounds. But- How long does it come to,
Joe?"

     "Two thousand one hundred and three years."

     "Call it two thousand. What's the matter, Hugh?"

     "Uh, nothing, nothing."

     "If you're going to throw up, go outside; I picked these rugs
myself. As I was saying, you've given my scientists something to think
about-and a good thing, too; they haven't turned out anything more
important than a better mousetrap in years. Lazy scoundrels. I've told
them to come up with a sensible answer, no miracles. How five people-or
six-and a building of some mass could hurdle twenty centuries and never
break an egg. Exaggeration. Joe tells me it broke some bones and other
things. Speaking of bones, Joe tells me this won't please you-and it
didn't please him-but I ordered my scientists to disturb some bones.
Strontium sampling, that sort of thing; I suppose you've never heard of
it. Clear proof that the cadaver had matured before the period of
maximum radioactivity- Look, I warned you about these rugs. Don't do
it!" Hugh gulped. ("Karen! Karen! Oh, my darling!")

     "Better now? Perhaps I should have told you that a priest was
present, proper propitiations were made-exactly as if it had been one of
the Chosen. Special concession, my orders. And when the tests were
completed every atom was returned and the grave closed with proper rites."

     "That's true, Hugh," Joseph said gravely. "I was there. And I put
on fresh flowers. Flowers that will stay fresh, I'm told."

     "Certainly they will," Ponse confirmed, "until they wear out from
sheer erosion. I don't know why you use flowers but if there are any
other rites or sacrifices necessary to atone for what may seem to you a
desecration, just name it. I'm a broadminded man; I'm aware that other
times had other customs."

     "No. No, best let it be."

     "As you wish. It was done from scientific necessity. It seemed more
reasonable than amputating one of your fingers. Other tests also kept my
scientists from wiggling out of the obvious. Foods preserved by methods
so ancient that I doubt if any modem food expert would know how to
duplicate same- and yet the foods were edible. At least some servants
were required to eat them; no harm resulted. A fascinating radioactivity
gradient between upper and inner sides of the roof structure-I gave them
a hint on that. Acting on information received from Joe, I ordered them
to look for evidence that this event took place at the beginning of the
East-West War that destroyed the Northern Hemisphere.

     "So they found it. Calculations lead them to believe that the
structure must have been near the origin of an atom-kernel explosion.
Yet it was unhurt. That produced a theory so wild that I won't tire your
ears with it; I've told them to go on working.

     "But the best thing is the historical treasure. I am a man of
history, Hugh; history, properly interpreted, tells everything. The
treasure, of course, are those books that came along. I am not
exaggerating when I say that they are my most precious possessions.
There are only two other copies of the Encyclopaedia Britannica in the
world today-and those are not this edition and are in such poor shape
that they are curiosities rather than something a scholar can work with;
they weren't cared for during the Turmoil Ages."

     Ponse leaned back and looked happy. "But mine is in mint condition!"

     He added, "I'm not discounting the other books. Treasures, all of
them. Especially the Adventures of Odysseus, which is known only by
reputation. I take it that the pictures date from the time of Odysseus too?"

     "I'm afraid not. The artist was alive in my time."

     "Too bad. They're interesting, nevertheless. Primitive art,
stronger than we have now. But I exaggerated when I said that the books
were my dearest possession."

     "Yes?"

     "You are! There! Doesn't that please you?"

     Hugh barely hesitated. "Yes. If true." (If it's true that I am your
chattel, you arrogant bastard, I prefer being a valuable one!)

     "Oh, quite true. If you had been speaking in protocol mode, you
wouldn't have been able to phrase a doubt. I never lie, Hugh; remember
that. You and- That other one, Joe?"

     "Duke."

     "'Duke.' Although Joe speaks highly of your scholarship, not so
highly of its. But let me explain. There are other scholars who read
Ancient English. None in my household, true; since it is not a root
language to any important degree, few study it. Nevertheless, scholars
could be borrowed. But none such as yourself. You actually lived then;
you'll be able to translate knowledgeably, without these maddening four
and five interpretations of a single passage that disfigure most
translations from ancient sources, all because the scholar doesn't
really know what the ancient author was talking about. Lack of cultural
context, I mean. And no doubt you will be able to supply explanations
for things obscure to me and commonplace to you.

     "Right? Right! So you see what I want. Start with the Encyclopaedia
Britannica. Get busy today, translate it. Just scribble it out quickly,
sloppy but fast. Someone else will pretty it up for my eyes. Understand?
All right, go do it."

     Hugh gulped. "But, Ponse, I can't write Language."

     "What?"

     "I was taught to speak; I haven't been taught to read and write."

     Ponse blinked. "Memtok!"

     The Chief Palace Domestic arrived with such speed that one might
suspect that he was just outside the door. And so he had been-listening
in on private conversation by means Memtok was certain were not known to
the Lord Protector

     inasmuch as Memtok was still breathing. Such measures were risky
but he found them indispensable to efficient performance of his duties.
At worst, it was safer than planting a slut in there who was not quite a
deaf mute.

     "Memtok, I told you it was to be taught to speak, read, and write
Language."

     Hugh listened, eyes downcast, while the Chief Domestic tried to
protest that the order had never been given (it had not) but
nevertheless had been carried out (obviously false), all without
contradicting the Lord Protector (impossible to reconcile, inconceivable
to attempt).

     "Garbage," Ponse remarked. "I don't know why I don't put you up for
adoption. You would look good in a coal mine. That pale skin would be
improved by some healthy coal dust." He twitched his quirt and Memtok
paled still more. "Very well, let it be corrected. It is to spend half
of each day in learning to read and write, the other half in translating
and in dictating same into a recorder. I should have thought of that;
writing takes too long. Nevertheless, I want it to be able to read and
write." He turned to Hugh. "Anything you can think of? That you need?"

     Hugh started to phrase a request in the involved indirection which
presumed nothing, as required by protocol mode, rising.

     Ponse chopped him off. "Speak directly, Hugh. Memtok, close your
ears. No ceremony needed in Memtok's presence, he is a member of my
inner family, my nephew in spirit if not in the eyes of my senior
sister. Spit it out."

     Memtok relaxed and looked as beatific as his vinegar features
permitted. "Well, Ponse, I need room to work. My cell is the size of
that divan."

     "Describe your needs."

     "Well, I'd like a room with natural light, one with windows, say a
third the size of this one. Working tables, bookshelves, writing
materials, a comfortable chair-yes, and access to a toilet without
having to wait; it interferes with my thinking otherwise."

     "Don't you have that?"

     "No. And I don't think it helps my thinking to be touched up with a
whip."

     "Memtok, have you been whipping it?"

     "No, my uncle. I swear."

     "You would swear if you were caught with cream on your lip. Who has
been?"

     Hugh dared to interrupt. "I'm not complaining, Ponse. But those
whips make me nervous. And I never know who can give me orders. Anybody,
apparently. I haven't been able to find out my status."

     "Mmm- Memtok, where do you have it in the Family?" The head servant
barely conceded that he had not been able to solve that problem.

     "Let's solve it. We make it a department head. Mmm- Department of
Ancient History. Title: Chief Researcher. Senior head of department,
just below you. Pass the word around. I'm doing this to make clear how
valuable this servant is to me . . . and anyone who slows up its work is
likely to wind up in the stew. I suppose it will really be a one-servant
department but you fill it out, make it look good, by transferring its
teachers, and whoever looks out for its recorder and prepares the stuff
for me, a cleaner or two, an assistant to boss them- I don't want to
take up its valuable time on routine. A messenger. You know. There must
be dozens of idlers around this house, eating their silly heads off, who
would look well in the Department of Ancient History. Now have fetched a
lesser whip and a lesser badge. Move."

     In moments Hugh was wearing a medallion not much smaller than
Memtok's. Ponse took the whip and removed something from it. "Hugh, I'm
not giving you a charged whip, you don't know how to use it. If one of
your loafers need spurring, Memtok will be glad to help. Later, when you
know how, we'll see. Now- Are you satisfied?"

     Hugh decided that it was not the time to ask to see Barbara. Not
with Memtok present. But he was beginning to hope.

     He and Memtok were dismissed together. Memtok did not object when
Hugh walked abreast of him.

 

 

 

Chapter 13

 

 

     Memtok was silent while he led Hugh back down to servants' country;
he was figuring out how to handle this startling development to his own
advantage.

     This savage's status had troubled the Chief Domestic from arrival.
He didn't fit-and in Memtok's world everything had to fit. Well, now the
savage had an assigned status; Their Charity had spoken and that was
that. But the situation was not improved. The new status was so
ridiculous as to make the whole belowstairs structure (the whole world,
that is) a mockery.

     But Memtok was shrewd and practical. The bedrock of his philosophy
was: You can't fight City Hall, and his basic strategy in applying it
was the pragmatic rule: When you can't beat 'em, you join 'em.

     How could this savage's preposterous promotion be made to appear
necessary and proper-and a credit to the Chief Domestic?

     Uncle! The savage wasn't even tempered. Nor would he be. At least
not yet. Later, possibly-it would make everything so much more tidy.
Memtok had been amazed when Their Charity had postponed the obvious.
Memtok hardly recalled his own tempering; his emotions and drives before
that time were a thin memory-of someone else. There was no reason for
the savage to have kicked up a fuss about it; tempering marked promotion
into real living. Memtok looked forward to another half century of
activity, power, gracious living- what stud could claim that?

     But there it was. How to make it look good?

     A Curiosity!-that's what the savage was. All great lords possessed
Curiosities; there had been times when visiting in his own caste that he
had been embarrassed by the fact that his own lord took no interest in
Curiosities; there were not even Siamese twins nor a two-headed freak in
the whole household. Not even a flipper-armed dwarf. Their Charity
was-let's admit it-too simple in his tastes for his high rank; sometimes
Memtok was a little ashamed of him. Spending his time on scrolls and
such when he should be upholding the pride of the house.

     That lord in Hind- What title? Prince something or other silly.
Never mind, he had that big cage where studs and sluts lived and mated
with great apes, talked the same jabber-it wasn't Language-and you
couldn't tell which was which save that some were hairy and some were
smooth. There was a Curiosity worthy of a great household! That lord's
chief domestic had declared by the Uncle that there were live
crossbreeds from the experiment, hidden away where the priests couldn't
object. It might be true, since it was a fact that despite official
denial crossbreeds between servants and Chosen were possible-and did
happen, even though designated bedwarmers were always sterile. But these
accidents were never allowed to see the light of day.

     A Curiosity, that was the angle. An untempered who was nevertheless
a servant executive. A Famous Scholar who had not even been able to
speak Language when he was almost as old as Memtok. A man out of
nowhere. From the stars. Everybody knew that there were men somewhere in
the stars.

     Probably a miracle . . . and the temples were investigating and any
year now this household would be famous for its unique Curiosity. Yes. A
word here, a word there, a veiled hint- "Hugh," Memtok said cordially.
"May I call you 'Hugh'?" "What? Why, certainly!" "You must call me
'Memtok.' Let's stroll a bit and pick out space for your departmental
headquarters. You would like a sunny place, I understand. Perhaps rooms
facing the gardens? And do you want your personal quarters opening off
your headquarters? Or would you rather have them elsewhere so that you
can get away from it all?" The latter, Memtok decided. Roust out the
head gardener and the studmaster and give the savage both their
quarters-that would make everyone understand how important this
Curiosity was . . . and get both of them sore at the savage, too. He'd
soon realize who was his friend. Memtok, namely, and nobody else.
Besides, the gardener had been getting uppity, implying that his work
didn't come under the Chief Domestic. A touching up was what he needed.

     Hugh said, "Oh, I don't need anything fancy."

     "Come, come! We want you to have every facility. I wish 1 could get
away from it all sometimes. But I can't-problems, problems, problems,
every minute of the day; some people have to have all their thinking
done for them. It will be a treat to have a man of the mind among us.
We'll find you cozy quarters, plenty of room for you and your valet. But
separate." Valet? Was there a tempered young buck around, well
housebroken and biddable, who could be depended on to report everything
and keep his mouth shut? Suppose he had his sister's eldest son tempered
now, would the lad shape up in time? And would his sister see the wisdom
in it? He had great hopes for the boy. Memtok was coldly aware that he
would have to go someday-though not for many years-and he was determined
that his heir should succeed to his high office. But it would take
planning, and planning could never start too soon. If his sister could
be made to see it- Memtok led Hugh through crowded passageways; servants
scurried out of the way wherever they went-save one who stumbled and got
tingled for his awkwardness.

     "My!" said Hugh. "This is a big building."

     "This? Wait till you see the Palace-though no doubt it is falling
to rack and ruin, under my chief deputy. Hugh, we use only a quarter of
the staff here. There is no formal entertaining, just garden parties.
And only a handful of guests. In the city the Chosen are always coming
and going. Many a time I am rooted out of bed in the night to open
apartments for some lord and his ladies without a moment's warning. And
that is where planning counts. To -be able to open the door of a
guest-wing flat and know-know, mind you, without looking-that beds are
freshly perfumed, refreshments waiting, everything spotless, music
softly playing."

     "That must take real staff work."

     "Staff work!" Memtok snorted. "I wish I could agree. What it takes
is for me to inspect every room, every night, no matter how tired I am,
before I go to bed. Then stay up to see that mistakes are corrected, not
depend on their lies. They're all liars, Hugh. Too much 'Happiness.'
Their Charity is generous; he never cuts down on the ration."

     "I've found the food ample. And good."

     "I didn't say food, I said 'Happiness.' I control the food and I
don't believe in starving them, not even as punishment. A tingle is
better. They understand that. Always remember one thing, Hugh; most
servants don't really have minds. They're as thoughtless as the
Chosen-not referring to Their Charity of course; I would never criticize
my own patron. I mean Chosen in general. You understand." He winked and
gave Hugh a dig in the ribs.

     "I don't know much about the Chosen," Hugh admitted. "I've hardly
laid eyes on them."

     "Well. . . you'll see. It takes more than a dark skin to make
brains no matter what they teach in temple. Not that I expect you to
quote me nor would I admit it if you did. But- Who do you think runs
this household?"

     "I haven't been here long enough to express opinions."

     "Very shrewd. You could go far if you had ambition. Let me put it
this way. If Their Charity goes away, the household goes on smoothly as
ever. If I am away, or dare to fall sick- Well, I shudder to think of
it." He gestured with his whip. "They know. You won't find them
scurrying that fast to get out of his way."

     Hugh changed the subject. "I did not understand your remark about a
'ration of Happiness.'"

     "Haven't you been receiving yours?"

     "I don't know what it is."

     "Oho! One bullock gets you three that it has been issued but never
got as far as you. Must look into that. As to what it is, I'll show
you." Memtok led him up a ramp and out onto a balcony. Below was the
servants' main dining hail, crowded with three queues. "This, is issue
time-studs at a different hour, of course. They can have it as drink, in
chewing form, or to smoke. The dosage is the same but some say that
smoking it produces the keenest happiness."

     Memtok used words not in Hugh's vocabulary; Hugh told him so.
Memtok said, "Never mind. It improves the appetite, steadies the nerves,
promotes good health, enhances all pleasures-and wrecks ambition. The
trick is to be able to take it or leave it alone. I never took it
regularly even when I was at stud; I had ambition. I take it now only on
feast days or such-in moderation." Memtok smiled. "You'll find out tonight."

     "I will?"

     "Didn't I tell you? Banquet in your honor, just after evening prayer."

     Hugh was hardly listening. He was searching the far queue, trying
to spot Barbara.

     Memtok sent the Chief Veterinarian and the Household Engineer as an
escort of honor for Hugh. Hugh was mildly embarrassed at this attention
from the physician and surgeon in view of the helpless posture he had
been in the last time he had seen the man. But the veterinarian was most
cordial.

     Memtok headed the long table with Hugh on his right. Twenty
department heads were seated; there was one lower servant standing
behind each guest and endless streams coming in and out from kitchen and
pantry. The banquet room was beautiful, its furnishings lavish, and the
feast was sumptuous and endless; Hugh wondered what a meal of the Chosen
must be like if their upper servants ate this way.

     He soon found out, in part. Memtok was served twice, once from the
tasty dishes everyone shared, again from another menu. These dishes he
sampled, using separate plates, but rarely did more than taste. Of the
regular menu he ate sparingly and sometimes passed up dishes.

     He noticed Hugh's glance. "The Lord Protector's dinner. Try it. At
your own risk, of course."

     "What risk?"

     "Poison, naturally. When a man is over a hundred years old his heir
is certain to be impatient. To say nothing of business competitors,
political rivals, and subverted friends. Go ahead; the taster tries it
half an hour before Their Charity- or I-touches it, and we've lost only
one taster this year."

     Hugh decided that his nerve was being tested; he tried a spoonful.

     "Like it?" asked the Chief Domestic.

     "Seems greasy to me."

     "Hear that, Gnou? Our new cousin is a man of taste. Greasy. Someday
you'll be fried in your own grease, I fear. The truth is, Hugh, that we
eat better than the Chosen do. . . although courses are served more
elaborately in the Grand Hall, of course. But I am a gourmet who
appreciates artistry; Their Charity doesn't care what it is as long as
it doesn't squeal when he bites it. If the sauces are too elaborate, the
spices too exotic, he'll send it back with a demand for a slice of
roast, a hunk of bread, and a pitcher of milk. True, Gnou?"

     "You have said it."

     "And frustrating."

     "Very," admitted the chef.

     "So Cousin Gnou's best cooks work for us, and the Chosen struggle
along with ones whose chief skill lies in getting a bird's skin back on
without ruffling the feathers. Cousin Hugh, if you will excuse me, I
must lift up to the Grand Hall and attempt by proper ceremony to make
Cousin Gnou's pièce de résistance seem better than it is. Don't believe
what they tell you about me while I'm gone-regrettably it's all true."
He exposed his teeth in what must have been a smile and left.

     No one spoke for a while. Finally someone-Hugh thought it was the
transportation master but he had met too many- said, "Chief Researcher,
what household were you with before you were adopted, may one ask?"

     "One may. House of Farnham, Freeholder Extraordinary."

     "So. I am forced to admit that the title of your Chosen is new to
me. A new title, perhaps?"

     "Very old," Hugh answered. "Extremely ancient and granted directly
by Uncle the Mighty, blessed be His Name. The rank is roughly that of
king, but senior to it."

     "Really?"

     Hugh decided to drop that shovel for a wider one. In earlier
conversation he had learned that Memtok knew a great deal about many
things-but almost nothing about such trivia as history, geography, and
matters outside the household. And from his Language lessons he knew
that a servant who could read and write was rare, even among executives,
unless the skill was necessary to his duties. Memtok had told him
proudly that he had petitioned the opportunity while he was still at
stud and had labored at it to the amusement of the other studs. "I had
my eyes on the future," he had told Hugh. "I could have had five more
years, probably ten, at stud-but as soon as I could read, I petitioned
to be tempered. So I had the last laugh-for where are they now?"

     Hugh decided on the very widest shovel; a big lie was always easier
to sell. "The title is unbroken for three thousand years in House
Farnham. The line remained intact by direct intervention of the Uncle
right through Turmoil and Change. Because of its Divine origin its
holder speaks to the Proprietor as an equal, 'thee' and 'thou.'" Hugh
drew himself up proudly. "And I was factotum-in-chief to Lord Farnham."

     "A noble house indeed. But 'factotum-in-chief'? We don't use that
designation here. A domestic?"

     "Yes and no. The chief domestic works under the factotum."

     The man almost gasped. "And so," Hugh went on, "do all servant
executives, domestic or not-business, political, agrarian, everything.
The responsibility is wearing."

     "So I should imagine!"

     "It is. I was growing old and my health was failing-I suffered a
temporary paralysis of my lower limbs. Truthfully I never liked
responsibility, I am a scholar. So I petitioned to be adopted and here I
am-scholar to a Chosen of similar scholarly 'tastes . . . a fitting
occupation for my later years." Hugh realized that he had stretched one
item too far; the veterinarian looked up. "This paralysis, I noted no
signs of it." (Damn it, doctors never cared about anything but their
specialty!) "It came on me suddenly one morning," Hugh said smoothly,
"and I haven't been troubled by it since. But to a man of my years it
was a warning."

     "And what are your years? Professional interest, of course. One may
ask?"

     Hugh tried to make the snub as direct as some he had heard Memtok
pass out. "One may not. I'll let you know when I need your services.
But," he added, to sooth the smart, "it would be fair to say that I was
born some years earlier than Their Charity."

     "Astonishing. From your physical condition-quite good, I thought-I
would have judged you to be no more than sixty, at most."

     "Blood will tell," Hugh said smugly. "I am not the only one of my
bloodline to live a very long time."

     He was saved from further evasions by the return of Memtok.
Everyone stood up. Hugh didn't notice in time, so he remained seated and
brazened it out. If Memtok resented it, he did not let it show. He
clapped Hugh on the shoulder as he sat down. "No doubt they've told you
how I eat my own young?"

     "I was given the impression of a happy family presided over by a
beloved uncle."

     "Liars, all of them. Well, I'm through for the evening- until some
emergency. Their Charity knows that we are welcoming you; he commanded
me not to return to the Grand Hall. So now we can relax and be merry."
The Chief Domestic tapped his goblet with a spoon. "Cousins and nephews,
a toast to our newest cousin. Possibly you heard what I said-the Lord
Protector is pleased at our modest effort to make Cousin Hugh feel at
home in Their Family. But I am sure that you already guessed that . . .
since one cannot miss that Cousin Hugh carries, not a least whip, but a
lesser whip exactly like mine!" Memtok smiled archly. "Let us trust that
he will never need to use it."

     Loud applause greeted the boss's brilliant sally. He went on
solemnly, "You all know that not even my chief deputy carries such
authority, much less the ordinary department head

     and from that I am sure you conclude that a hint from Cousin Hugh,
Chief Researcher and Aide in Scholarship to Their Charity by direct
appointment-a hint from him is an order from me-so don't let me have to
make it a direct order.

     "And now the toasts! All cousins together and let Happiness flow
freely . . . so let the junior among us give the first toast. Who claims
it, who claims it?"

     The party got rowdy. Hugh noted that Memtok drank sparingly. He
remembered the warning and tried to emulate him. It was impossible. The
Chief Domestic could drop out of any toast, merely raise his glass, but
Hugh as guest of honor felt compelled to drink them all.

     Some unknown time later Memtok led him back to his newly acquired,
luxurious quarters. Hugh felt drunk but not unsteady-it was just that
the floor was so far away. He felt illuminated, possessed of the wisdom
of the ages, floating on silvery clouds, and soaked through with angelic
happiness. He still had no idea what was in Happiness drinks. Alcohol?
Maybe. Betel nut? Mushrooms? Probably. Marijuana? It seemed certain. He
must write down the formula while it was fresh in his mind. This was
what Grace should have had! He must- But of course, she did have it now.
How very nice! Poor old Grace- He had never understood her-all she
needed was a little Happiness.

     Memtok took him into his bedroom. Sleeping across the foot of his
lovely new bed was a female creature, blond and cuddly.

     Hugh looked down at her from about a hundred-foot elevation and
blinked. "Who she?"

     "Your bedwarmer. Didn't I say?"

     "But-"

     "It's quite all right. Yes, yes, I know you are technically a stud.
But you can't harm her; this is what she is for. No danger. Not even
altered. A natural freemartin."

     Hugh turned around to discuss it, wheeling slowly because of his
great width and high sail area. Memtok was gone. Hugh found that he
could just make it to the bed. "Move over, Kitten," he muttered, and
fell asleep.

     He overslept but the kitten was still there; she had his breakfast
waiting. He looked at her with unease-not because he had a hangover; he
did not. Apparently Happiness did not exact such payments. He felt
physically strong, mentally alert, and morally straight-and very hungry.
But this teen-ager was an embarrassment.

     "What's your name, kitten?"

     "May it please them, this one's name is of such little importance
that whatever they please to call it will be a boon."

     "Cut it, cut it! Use equals speech."

     "I don't really have a name, sir. Mostly they just say, 'Hey, you.'"

     "All right, I'll call you 'Kitten.' Does that suit you? You look
like a kitten."

     She dimpled. "Yes, sir. It's ever so much nicer than 'Hey, you.'"

     "All right, your name is 'Kitten.' Tell everybody and don't answer
to 'Hey, you.' Tell them that is official because the Chief Researcher
says so and if anybody doubts it, tell them to check with the Chief
Domestic. If they dare."

     "Yes, sir. Thank you, sir. Kitten, Kitten, Kitten," she repeated as
if memorizing it, then giggled. "Pretty!"

     "Good. Is that my breakfast?"

     "Yes, sir."

     He ate in bed, offering her bits, and discovered that she expected
to be fed, or at least allowed to eat. There was enough for four;
between them they ate enough for three. Then he learned that she
expected to assist him in the bathroom; he put a stop to that.

     Later, ready to go to his assigned duties, he said to her, "What do
you do now?"

     "I go back to sluts' quarters, sir, as soon as you release me. I
come back at bedtime-whatever time you say."

     He was about to tell her that she was charming and that he almost
regretted passing .out the night before but that he did not require her
services on future- He stopped. An idea had hit him. "Look. Do you know
a tall slut named Barbara? Oh, this much taller than you are. She was
adopted something over two weeks ago and she had babies, twin boys,
about a week ago."

     "Oh, yes, sir. The savage."

     "That's the one. Do you know where' she is?"

     "Oh, yes, sir. She's still in lying-in quarters. I like to go in
there and look at the babies." She looked wistful. "It must be nice."

     "Uh, yes. Can you take a message to her?"

     Kitten looked doubtful. "She might not understand. She's a savage,
she can't talk very well."

     "Mmm- Damn. No, maybe it's a help. Wait a moment." His quarters
were equipped with a desk; he went to it, got one of those extraordinary
pens-they didn't stain and didn't wear out and appeared to be
solid-found a piece of paper. Hastily he wrote a note, asking Barbara
about herself and the twins, reporting his odd promotion, telling her
that soon, somehow, he would see her-be patient, dear-and assuring her
of his undying devotion.

     He added a P.S. "The bearer of this note is 'Kitten'-if the bearer
is short, blond, busty, and about fourteen. She is my bedwarmer-which
means nothing and you've got an evil mind, wench! I'm going to hang onto
her because she is a way-the only way, it would appear-for me to
communicate with you. I'll try to write every day, I'll darn well expect
a note from you every day. If you can. And if anybody does anything you
don't like, tell me and I'll send you his head on a platter. I think.
Things are looking up. Plenty of paper and a pen herewith. Love, love,
love-H.

     "PPS-go easy on 'Happiness.' It's habit-forming."

     He gave the girl the note and writing materials. "You know the
Chief Domestic by sight?"

     "Oh, yes, sir. I've warmed his bed. Twice."

      "Really? I'm amazed."

     "Why, sir?"

     "Well, I didn't think he would be interested."

     "You mean because he's tempered? Oh, but several of the executives
like to have a bedwarmer anyhow. I like it better than being sent
upstairs; it's less trouble and you get lots more sleep. The 'Chief
Domestic doesn't usually send for a bedwarmer, though-it's just that he
checks us and teaches us manners before we are allowed to serve
upstairs." She added, "You see, he knows all about it; he used to be a
stud, you know." She looked at Hugh with innocent curiosity. "Is it true
what they say about you? May one ask?"

     "Uh. . . one may not."

     "I'm sorry, sir." She looked crushed. "I didn't mean any harm." She
glanced fearfully at his whip, dropped her eyes.

     "Kitten."

     "Yes, sir."

     "See this whip?"

     "Uh, yessir!"

     "You will never, never, never feel my whip. That's a promise.
Never. We're friends."

     Her face lit up and she looked angelically beautiful instead of
pretty. "Oh, thank you, sir!"

     "Another thing. The only whip you need fear from now on is the
Chief Domestic's-so stay out of his way. Anyone else-any 'least
whip'-you tell him, or her, that this lesser whip is what he'll get if
he touches you. Tell him to check with the Chief Domestic. Understand me?"

     "Yes, sir." She looked smugly happy.

     Too smug, Hugh decided. "But you stay out of trouble. Don't do
anything to deserve a tingle-or I might turn you over to the Chief
Domestic for a real tingling, the sort he is famous for. But as long as
you work for me, don't allow anyone but him to tingle you. Now git and
deliver that. I'll see you tonight, about two hours after evening
prayer. Or come earlier if you are sleepy, and go to bed." Must remember
to have a little bed put here for her, he reminded himself.

     Kitten touched her forehead and left. Hugh went to his office and
spent a happy day learning the alphabet and dictating three articles
from the Britannica. He found his vocabulary inadequate, so he sent for
one of his teachers and used the man as a dictionary. Even so, he found
it necessary to explain almost endlessly; concepts had changed.

     Kitten went straight to the Chief Domestic's office, made her
report, turned over the note and writing materials. Memtok was much
annoyed that he held in his hand what might be important evidence-and no
way to read it. It did occur to him that that other one-Duke? Juke? Some
such-might be able to read these hen scratches. But not likely, of
course, and even under tingling there would be no certainty that Juke
would translate honestly, and no way to check on him.

     Asking Joe never crossed his mind. Nor did asking Their Charity's
new bedwarmer. But the impasse had one intriguing aspect. Was it
possible that this savage slut actually could read? And perhaps even
essay to write a reply?

     He stuck the note in his copier, gave it back to the girl. "All
right, your name is Kitten. And do exactly as he tells you about not
letting yourself be tingled-and be sure to gossip about it; I want it
known all over. But get this-" He gave Kitten the gentlest of reminders;
she jumped. "This whip is waiting for you, if you make any mistakes."

     "This one hears and obeys!"

     Hugh returned from the executives' dining room rather late; he had
sat around and gossiped. He found Kitten asleep in his bed and
remembered that he had forgotten to ask for another bed for her.

     'Clutched in her hand was a folded paper. Gently he worked it out
without waking her:

 

Darling!

     How utterly wonderful to see your handwriting! I knew from Joe that
you were safe, hadn't heard about your promotion, didn't know whether
you knew about the twins. First about them- They are thriving, they both
look like their papa, both have his angelic disposition. Six pounds each
at birth is my guess, but, although they were weighed, weights here mean
nothing to me. Me? I'm a prize cow, dearest, no trouble at all-and the
care I received (and am receiving) is fantastically good. I started to
labor, was given something to drink, never hurt again although I
remember all details of having two babies-as if it had happened to
somebody else. So trouble free and actually pleasant that I'd be willing
to do it every day. And would, if the rewards were as nice as little
Hugh and Karl Joseph.

     As for the rest, boring except for our fine boys, but I'm learning
the language as fast as I can. And somebody should tell the Borden
Company about me-which is good, as our scamps are greedy eaters. I'm
even able to help out the girl in the next bed, who is short on milk.
Just call me Elsie.

     I'll be patient. I'm not surprised at your new honors; I expect
that you'll be bossing the place in a month. I have confidence in my
man. My husband. Such a beautiful word- As for Kitten, I don't believe
your Boy Scout assertions, my lecherous darling; your record shows that
you take advantage of innocent young girls. And she's awfully cute.

     Seriously, dearest, I know how noble you are and I didn't have an
evil-minded thought. But I would not blame you if your nobility
slipped-especially as I've picked up enough words to be aware of her odd
category in this strange place. I mean, Kitten is not vulnerable and
can't go set. If you did slip, I would not be jealous-not much,
anyhow-but I would not want it to become a habit. Not to the exclusion
of me, at least; my hormones are rearranging themselves very rapidly.
But I don't want you to get rid of her when she is our only way of
communicating. Be nice to her; she's a nice kid. But you're always nice
to everyone.

     I will write every day-and I will cry into my pillow and be worried
to death any day I don't hear from you.

 

My love forever and forever,

B

P.S. The smear is little Hugh's right footprint.

 

     Hugh kissed the letter, then got into bed, clutching it. Kitten did
not wake.

 

 

 

Chapter 14

 

 

 

     Hugh found learning to read and write Language not difficult.
Spelling was phonetic, a sign for every sound. There were no silent
letters and never any question about spelling or pronunciation. Accent
was on the penultima unless marked; the system was as free from traps as
Esperanto. He could sound out any word as soon as he had learned the
47-letter alphabet, and, with thought, he could spell any word he could
pronounce.

     Writing and printing were alike, cursive, and a printed page looked
like one written by a skilled penman. He was not surprised to find that
it looked like Arabic and a search in the Britannica confirmed that the
alphabet must have derived from Arabic of his time. Half a dozen letters
had not changed; some were similar although changed. There were many new
letters to cover the expansion into a system of one sound, one sign-plus
letters for sounds XXth century Arabic had never used. Search in the
Britannica convinced him that Arabic, French, and Swahili were the main
roots of Language, plus Uncle alone knew what else. He could not confirm
this; a dictionary with derivations, such as he had been used to for
English, apparently did not exist-and his teachers seemed convinced that
Language had always been just as they knew it. The concept of change
baffled them.

     It was only of intellectual interest; Hugh knew neither Arabic,
French, nor Swahili. He had learned a little Latin and less German in
high school, and had struggled to learn Russian in his later years. He
was not equipped to study the roots of Language, he was merely curious.

     Nor did he dare spend time on it; he wanted to please Their
Charity, butter him up so that he might, eventually, petition the boon
of seeing Barbara-and that meant a flood of translated articles. Hugh
worked very hard.

     The second day after his elevation, Hugh asked for Duke, and Memtok
sent for him. Duke was rather worn down-there were lines in his face-but
he spoke Language. Duke spoke it not as well as his father and
apparently had tangled more with his teachers; his mood seemed to
oscillate between hopelessness and rebellion, and he limped badly.

     Memtok made no objection to transferring Duke to the Department of
Ancient History. "Glad to get rid of him. He's too monstrous big for
stud, yet he doesn't seem to be good for anything else. Certainly, put
him to work. I can't bear to see a servant lying around, eating his head
off, doing nothing."

     So Hugh took him. Duke looked over Hugh's private apartment and
said, "Christ! You certainly managed to come up smelling like a rose.
How come?"

     Hugh explained the situation. "So I want you to translate legal
articles and related subjects-whatever you can do best."

     Duke shoved his fists together and looked stubborn. "You can stuff it."

     "Duke, don't take that attitude. This is an opportunity."

     "For you, maybe. What are you doing about Mother?"

     "What can I do? I'm not allowed to see her, neither are you. You
know that. But Joe assures me that she is not only comfortable and well
treated, but happy."

     "So he says. Or so you say he says. I want to see it myself. I damn
well insist on it."

     "Very well, insist on it. Go see Memtok about it. But I must warn
you, I can't protect you from him."

     "Rats. I know what that slimy little bastard would say-and what he
would do." Duke scowled and rubbed his injured leg. "It's up to you to
arrange it. You've got such an unholy drag around here, the least you
can do is use it to protect Mother."

     "Duke, I don't have that sort of drag. I'm being pampered for the
reason a race horse is pampered . . . and I have just as little to say
about it as a race horse has. But I can cut you in on pampering if you
cooperate-decent quarters, immunity from mistreatment, a pleasant place
to work. But I can no more get you into women's quarters, or have Grace
sent here, than I can go to the Moon. They have harem rules here, as you
know."

     "And you are content to sit here and be a trained seal for that
ape, and neglect Mother? Count me out!"

     "Duke, I won't argue. I'll assign you a room and send you a volume
of the Britannica each day. Then it's up to you. If you won't work, I'll
try to keep Memtok from knowing it. But I think he has spies all over
the place."

     Hugh let it go at that. At first he got no help out of Duke. But
boredom worked where argument failed; Duke could not stand to be shut up
in a room with nothing to do. He was not locked up but he did not
venture out much because there was always the chance that he might run
into Memtok, or some other whip-carrying upper servant, who might want
to know what he was doing, and why-servants were expected to look busy
even if they weren't, from morning prayer to evening prayer.

     Duke began to produce translations and, with them, a complaint that
he was short on vocabulary. Hugh was able to have assigned to him a
tempered clerk who had worked in Their Charity's legal affairs.

     But he rarely saw Duke-it seemed to be the only way they could stay
out of arguments. Duke's output speeded up after the first week but fell
off in quality-Duke had discovered the sovereign power of "Happiness."

     Hugh considered warning Duke about the drug, decided against it. If
it kept Duke contented, who was he to deny him this anodyne? The quality
of Duke's translations did not worry Hugh; Their Charity had no way to
judge-unless Joe rendered an opinion, which seemed unlikely. He himself
was not trying too hard to turn out good translations; "not good, but
Wednesday" was the principle he used: Give the boss lucid copy in great
quantity-and leave out the hard parts.

     Besides, Hugh found that a couple of drinks of Happiness at dinner
topped off the day. It allowed him to read Barbara's daily letter in a
warm glow, write a cheerful answer for Kitten to carry back, then to bed
and sound sleep.

     But Hugh did not use much of it; he was afraid of the stuff.
Alcohol, he reasoned, had the advantage of being a poison. It gave fair
warning if one started drinking heavily. But this stuff exacted no such
price; it merely turned anxiety, depression, worry, boredom, any
unpleasant emotion, into an uncritical happy glow. Hugh wondered if it
was principally methyl meprobamate? But he knew little chemistry and
that little was two thousand years behind times.

     As a member of the executive servants' mess Hugh could have all he
wanted. But he noted that Memtok was not the only boss who used the
stuff abstemiously; a man did not fight his way up in the servants'
hierarchy by dulling himself with drugs-but sometimes a servant did get
high up, then skidded to the bottom, unable to stand prosperity in the
form of unrationed Happiness. Hugh never learned what became of them.

     Hugh could even keep a bottle in his rooms-and that solved the
problem of Kitten.

     Hugh had decided not to ask for a bed for Kitten; he did not want
to rub Memtok's nose in the fact that he was using the child only as a
go-between to women's quarters. Instead he required the girl to make up
a bed each night on the divan in his living room.

     Kitten was very hurt by this. By now she was sure that Hugh could
make better use of a bedwarmer and she regarded it as rebuke to her in
her honorable capacity as comfort and solace-and it scared her. If her
master did not like her, she might lose the best job she had ever had.
(She did not dare report to Memtok that Hugh had no use for her as a
bedwarmer; she gave reports on every point but that.)

     She wept.

     She could not have done better; Hugh Farnham had been a sucker for
women's tears all his life. He took her on his knee and explained that
he liked her very much (true), that it was a sad thing but he was too
old to appreciate a female bedmate (a lie), and that he slept badly and
was disturbed by having anyone in bed with him (a half-truth)-and that
he was satisfied with her and wanted her to go on serving him. "Now wipe
your eyes and have a drink of this."

     He knew that she used the stuff; she chewed her ration like bubble
gum-chewing gum it was in fact; the powder was added to chicle. Most
servants preferred gum because they could go dreamily through the day,
chewing it while they worked. Kitten passed her empty days chewing it
and chewed the played-out cud in Hugh's quarters after she learned he
did not mind. So he did not hesitate to give her a drink.

     Kitten went happily to bed and right to sleep, no longer worried
that her master might get rid of her. That set a precedent. Each
evening, half an hour before Hugh wanted the lights out, he would give
her a short drink of it.

     For a while he kept track of the level in the bottle. Kitten was
often in his quarters when he was not, he knew how much she enjoyed it,
and there were no locks in his quarters-his rank entitled him to locks
but Memtok had carefully not told him.

     He quit bothering when he was convinced that Kitten was not
snitching it. In fact, Kitten would have been terrified at the thought
of stealing from her master. Her ego was barely big enough for a mouse;
she was less than nothing and knew it and had never owned anything, not
even a name, until Hugh gave her one. Under his kindness she was
beginning to be a person, but it was still the faintest flicker,
anything could blow it out. She would no more have risked stealing from
him than she would have risked killing him.

     Hugh, half by intent, encouraged her confidence. She was a trained
bath girl; he gave in and let her scrub his back and handle the nozzles
for his bath, dress him, and take care of his clothes. She was a
masseuse, too; he sometimes found it pleasant to have his head and neck
rubbed after a day spent poring over the fine print or following the
lines in a scroll reader-and she was pathetically anxious to do anything
to make herself necessary.

     "Kitten, what do you do in the daytime?"

     "Why, nothing mostly. Sluts of my subcaste mostly don't have to
work if they have night duty. Since I'm having duty every night I'm
allowed to stay in the sleep room until midday. So I do, even if I'm not
sleepy, because the slutmaster is likely to put one to work if he
catches one just wandering around. Afternoons- Well, mostly I try to
stay out of sight. That's best. Safest."

     "I see. You can hide out in here if you like. Or can you?"

     Her face lit up. "If you give me a pass, I can."

     "All right, I will. You can watch television- No, it's not on at
that hour. Mmm, you don't know how to read. Or do you?"

     "Oh, no, sir! I wouldn't dare petition."

     "Hmm-" Hugh knew that permission to learn to read could not be
granted even by Memtok; it required Their Charity's permission and was
granted only after investigation of the necessity. Furthermore, anything
he did that was out of line jeopardized his thin chances of reunion with
Barbara.

     But- Damn it, a man had to be a man! "There are scrolls in here and
a reader. Do you want to learn?"

     "Uncle protect us!"

     "Don't swear. If you want to-and can keep your pretty little mouth
shut-I'll teach you. Don't look so damned scared! You don't have to
decide now. Tell me later. Just don't talk about it. To anyone."

     Kitten did not. It scared her not to report it, but she had a
reflex for self-preservation and felt without knowing why that to report
this would endanger her happy setup.

     Kitten became substitute family life for Hugh. She sent him to work
cheerful, greeted him with a smile when he came back, talked if he
wanted to talk and never spoke unless spoken to. Most evenings she
curled up 'in front of the television-Hugh thought of it as "the
television" and it was in fact closed-circuit television under
principles not known to him, in color, in three dimensions, and without
lines.

     It played every evening in the servants' main hall, from evening
prayer until lights-out, to a packed house, and there were outlets in
the apartments of executive servants. Hugh had watched it several
evenings, expecting to gain insight into this strange society he must
learn to live in.

     He decided that one might as well try to study the United States by
watching Gunsmoke. It was blatant melodrama, with acting as stylized as
Chinese theater, and the favorite plot seemed to be that of the faithful
servant who dies gloriously that his lord may live.

     But it was only second in importance to Happiness in the morale of
life belowstairs. Kitten loved it.

     She would watch it, snapping her gum, and suppressing squeals of
excitement, while Hugh read-then sigh happily when the program ended,
accept her little drink of Happiness with profuse thanks and a touch of
her forehead, and go quietly to sleep. Hugh sometimes went on reading.

     He read a great deal-every evening (unless Memtok stopped in to
visit) and half of every day. He begrudged the time he spent translating
for Their Charity but never neglected it; it was the hopeful key to
better things. He had found it necessary to study modern culture if he
was to translate matters of ancient history intelligibly. The Summer
Palace had a fair library; he was given access when he claimed necessity
for his work-Memtok arranged it.

     But his true purpose was not translation but to try to understand
what had happened to his world to produce this world.

     So he usually had a scroll in the reader, in his office, or in his
living room. The scroll system of printing he found admirable; it
mechanized the oldest form of book into a system far more efficient than
bound leaves-drop the double cylinder into the reader, flip it on, and
hold still. The letters raced across in front of his eyes several
hundred feet at a whack, to the end of the scroll. Then the scroll
flipped over and chased back the following line, which was printed
upside down to the one just scanned.

     The eye wasted no time flipping back and forth at stacked lines.
But a slight pressure speeded the gadget up to whatever the brain could
accept. As Hugh got used to the phonetics, he acquired speed faster than
he had ever managed in English. But he did not find what he was looking for.

     Somewhere in 'the past the distinctions between fact, fiction,
history, and religious writings seemed to have been rubbed out. Even
when he got it clear that the East-West War that had bounced him out of
his own century was now dated 703 B.C. (Before the Great Change), he
still had trouble matching the world he had known with the "history" set
forth in these scrolls.

     The war itself he didn't find hard to believe. He had experienced
only a worm's-eye view of the first hours but what the scrolls related
matched the possibilities: a missile-and-bomb holocaust that had
escalated in its first minutes into "brilliant first strike" and
"massive retaliation" and smeared cities from Peiping to Chicago,
Toronto to Smolensk; fire storms that had done ten times the damage the
bombs did; nerve gas and other poisons that had picked up where fire
left off; plagues that were incubating when the shocked survivors were
picking themselves up and beginning to hope-plagues that were going
strong when fallout was no longer deadly.

     Yes, he could believe that. The bright boys had made it possible,
and the dull boys they worked for had not only never managed to make the
possibility unlikely but had never really believed it when the bright
boys delivered what the dull boys ordered.

     Not, he reminded himself, that he had believed in "Better red than
dead"-or believe in it now. The aggression had been one-sided as
hell-and he did not regret a megaton of the "massive retaliation."

     But there it was. The scrolls said that it had killed off the
northern world.

     But how about the rest of it? It says here that the United States,
at the time of the war, held its black population as slaves. Somebody
had chopped out a century. On purpose? Or was it honest confusion and
almost no records? There had been, he knew, a great book burning for two
centuries during the Turmoil, and even after the Change.

     Was it lost history, like Crete? Or did the priests like it better
this way?

     And since when were the Chinese classed as "white" and the Hindus
as "black"? Yes, purely on skin color Chinese and Japanese were as light
as the average "white" of his time, and Hindus were certainly as dark as
most Africans-but it was not the accepted anthropological ordering of
his day.

     Of course, if all they meant was skin shade-and apparently that was
what they did mean-he couldn't argue. The story maintained that the
whites, with their evil ways, destroyed each other almost to the last
man . . . leaving the innocent, charitable, merciful dark race-beloved
by Uncle the Mighty-to inherit the Earth.

     The few white survivors, spared by Uncle's mercy, had been succored
and cherished as children and now again were waxing numerous under the
benevolent guidance of the Chosen. So it read.

     Hugh could see that a war which smeared North America, Europe, all
of Asia except India, could kill off most whites and almost all Chinese.
But what had happened to the white minority in South America, the whites
of the Union of South Africa, and the Australians and New Zealanders?

     Search as he would, Hugh could not find out. All that seemed
certain was that the 'Chosen were dark whereas servants were pale
faces-and usually small. Hugh and his son towered over the other
servants. Contrariwise, the few Chosen he had seen were big men.

     If present-day whites were descended from Australians, mostly-No,
couldn't be, Aussies had not been runts. And those "Expeditions of
Mercy"-were they slave raids? Or pogroms? Or, as the scrolls said,
rescue missions for survivors?

     The book burnings might account for these discrepancies. It wasn't
clear to Hugh whether all books had been put to the torch, or possibly
technical books had been spared-for it was clear that the Chosen had
technology superior to that of his time; it seemed unlikely that they
had started from scratch.

     Or was it unlikely? All the technology of his own time that had
amounted to a damn had been less than five hundred years old, most of it
less than a hundred, and the most amazing parts less than a generation.
Could the world have gone back to a dark ages, then pulled out of it and
more, in two thousand years? Of course it could!

     Either way, the Koran had been the only book officially exempt from
the torch-and Hugh harbored a suspicion that the Koran had not been
spared either. He 'had owned a translation of the Koran, had read it
several times.

     He wished now that he had put it into the shelter, for the Koran as
he now read it in "Language" did not match his memory. For one thing, he
had thought that Mahomet was a redheaded Arab; this "Koran" mentioned
his skin color repeatedly, as black. And he was sure that the Koran was
free of racism. This "improved" version was rabid with it.

     Furthermore, this Koran had a new testament with a martyred
Messiah. He had taught and had been hanged for it- religious scrolls
were all marked with a gallows. Hugh did not object to a new testament;
there had been time for a new revelation and religions had them as
naturally as a cat has kittens. What he objected to was some revisionist
working over the words of the Prophet, apparently to make them fit this
new book. That wasn't fair, that was cheating.

     The social organization Hugh found almost as puzzling. He was
beginning to get a picture of a complex culture, stable, even
static-high technology, few innovations, smooth, efficient-and decadent.
Church and State were one-"One Tongue, One King, One People, One God."
The Lord Proprietor was sovereign and supreme pontiff and owned
everything under Uncle's grant, and the Lords Protector such as Ponse
were his bishops and held only fiefs. Yet there were plenty of private
citizens (Chosen, of course-a white was not a person), shopkeepers,
landowners, professional men, etc. A setup for an absolute totalitarian
communism yet streaked through with what appeared to be private
enterprise- Hell, there were even corporations if he understood what he
was reading.

     The most interesting point to Hugh (aside from the dismal fact that
his own status was fixed by law and custom at zero) was the inheritance
system. Family was everything, yet marriage was almost nothing-present
but not important. Descent was through the female line-but power was
exercised by males.

     This confused Hugh until it suddenly fell into place. Ponse was
Lord Protector because he was eldest son of an eldest daughter-whose
oldest brother had been Lord Protector before Ponse. Ponse's heir
therefore was his oldest sister's oldest son-title went down through
mother and daughter endlessly, with power vested in the oldest brother
of each female heir. It did not matter who Ponse's father was and it
mattered even less what sons he had; none of them could inherit. Ponse
inherited from his mother's brother; his heir was his sister's son.

     Hugh could see that, under this system, marriage would never be
important-bastardy might be a concept so abstract as to be
unrecognized-but family would be more important than ever. Women (of the
Chosen) could never be downgraded; they were more important than males
even though they ruled through their brothers-and Religion recognized
this; the One God, Uncle the Mighty, had an elder sister, the Eternal
Mamaloi. . . so sacred that she was not prayed to and her name was never
used in cursing. She was just there, the Eternal Female Principle that
gave all life and being.

     Hugh had a feeling that he had read about this sort of descent
before, uncle to nephew through the female line, so he searched the
Britannica. He was surprised to discover that the setup had prevailed at
one time or another in every continent and many cultures.

     The Great Change had been when Mamaioi had at last
succeeded-working indirectly, as always-in uniting all Her children
under one roof and placing their Uncle in charge. Then She could rest.

     Hugh's comment was: "And God help the human race!"

     Hugh kept expecting Their Charity to send for him. But two months
passed and he did not, and Hugh was beginning to fret that he would
never have a chance to ask to see Barbara-apparently Ponse had no
interest in him as long as he kept on grinding out translations.
Translating the Britannica looked like a job for several lifetimes; he
resolved to stir things up, so he sent one day's batch with a letter to
Their Charity.

     A week later the Lord Protector sent for him. Memtok came for Hugh,
dancing with impatience but insisting that Hugh wash his armpits, rub
himself with deodorant, and put on a clean robe.

     The Lord Protector did not seem to care how Hugh smelled; he let
him wait while he did something else. Hugh stood in silence. . .
although Grace was present. She was lounging on a divan, playing with
cats and chewing gum. She glanced at Hugh, then ignored him, save that
her face took on a secret smile that Hugh knew well- He called it
"canary that ate the cat."

     Dr.-Livingstone-I-Presume greeted Hugh, jumping down, coming over
and rubbing against his ankles. Hugh knew that he should ignore it, wait
for the lord to recognize his presence-but this cat had been his friend
a long time; he could not snub it. He bent down and stroked the cat.

     The skies did not split, Their Charity ignored the breach.

     Presently the Lord Protector said, "Boy, come here. What's this
about making money from your translations? What in Uncle gave you the
notion I needed money?"

     Hugh had got the notion from Memtok. The Chief Domestic had growled
about how difficult it was to run things, with penny-pinching from on
high getting worse every year.

     "May it please Their Charity, this one's opinions are of no value,
it is true, but-"

     "Cut the flowery talk, damn you!"

     "Ponse, back where-when-I came from there never was a man so rich
but what he needed more money. Usually, the richer he was, the more he
needed."

     The lord grinned. "'Plus ça change, plus c'est la même chose.'
Hugh, you aren't just sniffing Happiness. Things are the same now. Well?
What's your idea? Spit it out."

     "It seems to me that there are things in your encyclopaedia which
might be turned to a profit. Processes and such that have been lost in
the last two thousand years-but might be worth money now."

     "All right, do it. The stuff you send up is satisfactory, what I've
had time to read. But some of it is trivial. 'Smith, John, born and
died-a politician who did nothing much and did that little poorly.' Know
what I mean?"

     "I think so, Ponse."

     "All right, skip that garbage and dig me up four or five juicy
ideas I can cash in on."

     Hugh hesitated. Ponse said, "Well? Didn't you understand?"

     "I think I need help. You see, I don't know anything really, except
what goes on belowstairs. I thought Joe might help."

     "How?"

     "I understand that he has traveled with you, seen things. He is
more likely to be able to pick out subjects that merit study. He could
pick the articles, I will translate them, and you can judge whether
there is anything to exploit. I can synopsize them, so that you needn't
waste time wading through details if the subject doesn't merit it."

     "Good idea. I'm sure Joe will be happy to help. All right, send up
the encyclopaedia. All."

     Hugh was dismissed so abruptly that he had no chance to mention
Barbara. But, he reflected, he could not have risked it with Grace present.

     He considered digging out Duke, telling him that his mother was fat
and happy-both literally-but decided against it. He wasn't sure how
pleased Duke would be with a truthful report. They didn't see eye to eye
and that was that.

 

 

 

Chapter 15

 

 

 

     Joe sent down a volume every day for many days, with pages marked;
Hugh slaved to keep up and to make useful translations. After two weeks
Hugh was again sent for.

     He expected a conference over some business idea. What he found was
Ponse, Joe, and a Chosen he had never seen. Hugh instantly prepared to
speak protocol mode, rising.

     The Lord Protector said, "Come here, Hugh. Cut the cards. And don't
start any of that tiresome formality, this is family. Private."

     Hugh hesitantly approached. The other Chosen, a big dark man with a
permanent scowl, didn't seem pleased. He was carrying his quirt and
twitched it. But Joe looked up and smiled. "I've been teaching them
contract, Hugh, and our fourth had to be away. I've been telling Ponse
that you are the best player any where or when. So don't let me down."

     "I'll try not to." Hugh recognized one deck of cards, they had once
been his. The other deck appeared to be hand painted and were beautiful.
The card table was not from the shelter; fabulous hand craftsmanship had
gone into it.

     The cut made Hugh partner of the strange Chosen. Hugh tried not to
show how nervous it made him, as his partner clearly did not like it.
But the Chosen grunted and accepted it.

     His partner's contract, at three spades-by a fluke distribution
'they made four. His partner growled, "Boy, you underbid, you wasted
game. Don't let it happen again."

     Hugh kept quiet and dealt.

     On the next hand Joe and Ponse made five clubs. Hugh's partner was
furious-at Hugh. "If you had led diamonds, we would have set them! And
you washed out our leg. I warned you. Now I'm-"

     "Mrika!" Ponse said sharply. "This is contract. Play it as such.
And put that tickler down. The servant played correctly."

     "It did not! And I'm damned if I care for letting it in the game
anyhow. I can smell the rank, sharp stink of a buck servant no matter
how much it's scrubbed. I don't think this one is scrubbed at all."

     Hugh felt sweat breaking out in his armpits and flinched. But Ponse
said evenly, "Very well, we excuse you. You may leave."

     "That suits me!" The 'Chosen stood up. "Just one thing before I do-
If you don't quit staffing, Their Mercy will let the North Star
Protectorate-"

     "Are you planning to put up the money?" Their Charity said sharply.

     "Me? It's a Family matter. Not but what I wouldn't jump at the
chance! Forty million hectares and most of it in prime timber? Of course
I would! But I hardly have one bullock to jingle against another-and you
know why."

     "Certainly we know. You gamble."

     "Oh, come now! A businessman has to take chances. You can't call it
gambling when-"

     "We do call it gambling. We do not object to gambling but we have a
vast distaste for losing. If you must lose, you will do it with your own
bullocks."

     "But this isn't gambling, it's a sure thing-as well as getting us
in solid with Their Mercy. The Family-"

     "We decide what is good for the Family. Your turn will come soon
enough. In the meantime we are as anxious to please the Lord Proprietor
as you are. But not with bullocks the Family doesn't have in the treasury."

     "You could borrow it. The interest would only come to-.-"

     "You wanted to leave, Mrika. We note that you have left." Ponse
picked up cards and began to shuffle.

     The younger Chosen snorted and left.

     Ponse laid out a solitaire game, started to play. Presently he said
to Joe, "Sometimes that young man gets me so annoyed that I would
happily change my will."

     Joe looked puzzled. "I thought you could not disinherit him?"

     "Oh, no!" Their Charity looked shocked. "Not even a peasant can do
that. Where would we be if there were no stability here on Earth? I
wouldn't dream of it, even if the law permitted it; he's my heir. I was
just thinking of the servants."

     Joe said, "I don't follow you."

     "Why, you know- No, perhaps you don't. I keep forgetting that you
didn't grow up among us. My will disposes of things personally mine. Not
much-jewelry, scrolls, such. Value probably less than a million. Trivia.
Except household servants. Just the household, I'm not talking about
servants in mines or on ranches, or in our shipping lines. It's
customary to list all household servants in a will-otherwise they escort
their uncle." He grinned. "It would be a good joke on Mrika if he found
that he was going to have to raise the money to adopt fifteen hundred,
two thousand servants-or shut the house and live in a tent. I can just
see that. Why, the lad can't take a pee without four servants to shake
it. I doubt if he knows how to put on his boots. Hugh, if you tell me to
put the black lady on the red lord, I'll tingle you. I'm not in a good
mood."

     Hugh said hastily, "Did you miss a play? I hadn't noticed."

     "Then why were you staring at the cards?" Hugh had indeed been
staring at the game, trying to be invisibie. He had been made very
nervous by witnessing a quarrel between Ponse and his nephew. But he had
missed not a word, he found it extremely interesting.

     Ponse went on, "Which would you prefer, Hugh? To escort me to
Heaven? Or stay here and serve Mrika? Don't answer too quickly. If you
stay here, I venture you may be eating your own toes to stay your hunger
before I'm gone a year. . whereas Heaven is a nice place, so the Good
Scroll tells."

     "It's a hard choice."

     "Well, you don't have to make it, nor will you know. A servant
should never know, it keeps him on his toes. That scoundrel Memtok keeps
praying me for the honor of being in my escort. If I thought he was
sincere, I would dismiss him for incompetence." Ponse swept the cards
together. "Damn that lad! He's poor company but I had my liver set on a
few good, hard rubbers. Joe, we've got to teach more people to play.
Being left without a fourth is annoying."

     "Certainly," agreed Joe. "Right now?"

     "No, no. I want to play, damn it, not watch some beginner's
bumbles. I'm growing addicted. Takes a man's worries off his mind."

     Hugh was hit by inspiration. "Ponse, if you don't mind having
another servant in the game . . ."

     Joe brightened up. "Why, of course! He-"

     "Barbara," Hugh cut in fast, before Joe could mention Duke.

     Joe blinked. Then he smoothly picked it up. "He-Hugh, I mean-was
about to mention a servant named Barbara. Good bridge player."

     "Well! You've been teaching this game belowstairs, Hugh?" Ponse
added, "'Barbara'? A name I don't recognize. Not one of the upper servants."

     "You remember her," Joe said. "She was with us when you picked us
up. The tall one."

     "Oh, yes. Bigging, it was. Joe, are you telling me that a slut can
play this game?"

     "She's a top player," Joe assured him. "Plays better than I do.
Heavens, Ponse, she can play rings around you. Isn't that right, Hugh?"

     "Barbara is an excellent player."

     "This I must see to believe."

     A few minutes later Barbara, freshly bathed and scared, was fetched
in. She glanced at Hugh, looked startled silly, opened her mouth, closed
it, and stood mute.

     Ponse came up to her. "So this is the slut who is supposed to be
able to play contract. Stop trembling, little one; nobody's going to eat
you." In bluff words he convinced her that she was there only to play
bridge and that she was expected to relax and be informal-no fancy talk.
"Just behave as if you were downstairs, having a good time with other
servants. Hear me?"

     "Yes, sir."

     "Just one thing." He tapped her on her chest. "When you're my
partner, I shan't be angry if you make mistakes-after all, you're only a
slut and it's surprising that you can play an intellectual game at all.
But"-he paused- "when you are playing against me, if you fail to fight
for every trick, if I even suspect that you are trying to let me win, I
guarantee you'll tingle when you leave. Understand?"

     "That's right," agreed Joe. "Their Charity expects it. Just play by
the book, and play your best."

     "'By the book,' " Ponse repeated. "I've never seen this book but
that's the way Joe says he has taught me to play. So do it. All right,
let's cut the cards."

     Hugh hardly listened, he was drinking in the sight of Barbara. She
looked well and healthy although it was startling to see her slender
again-or almost, he corrected; she was still largish in the fanny and
certainly in the bust. She had lost most of her tan and was dressed in
the shapeless short robe all female servants wore belowstairs, but 'he
was delighted to see that she had not had her hair removed. It was
cropped but could grow back.

     He noticed that his own appearance seemed to startle her, realized
why. He said, smiling, "I comb my hair with a washrag now, Barbie. No
matter, I didn't have enough to matter. Now that I'm used to being
hairless, I like it."

     "You look distinguished, Hugh."

     "He's ugly as sin," said Ponse. "But are we chatting? Or playing
bridge? Your bid, Barba."

     They played for hours. As it progressed, Barbara seemed to relax
and enjoy it. She smiled a great deal, usually at Hugh, but also at Joe
and even at Their Charity. She played by the book and Ponse never found
fault. Hugh decided that their host was a good player, not yet perfect
but he remembered what cards had been played and usually bid accurately.
Hugh found him a satisfactory partner and an adequate opponent; it was a
good game.

     But once, with Barbara as Ponse's partner and contract in her hand,
Hugh saw when Ponse laid down the dummy that Ponse had overbid in his
answer. So he contrived to lose one sure trick, thereby letting Barbara
make contract, game, and rubber.

     It got him a glance with no expression from Barbara and Joe gave
him a look that had a twinkle in it, but Joe kept his mouth shut. Ponse
did not notice. He gave a bass roar, reached across and patted Barbara's
head. "Wonderful, wonderful! Little one, you really can play contract.
Why, I doubt if I could have made that myself."

     Nor did Ponse complain when, on the next rubber, Barbara and Hugh
gave him and Joe a trouncing. Hugh decided that Ponse had the inborn
honesty called "sportsmanship"-plus a good head for cards.

     One of the little deaf-mutes trotted in, knelt, and served Their
Charity a tumbler of something cold, then another to Joe. Ponse took a
swig, wiped his mouth and said, "Ah, that hits the spot!"

     Joe made a whispered suggestion to him. Ponse looked startled and
said, "Oh, certainly. Why not?"

     So Hugh and Barbara were served. Hugh was pleased to discover 'that
it was apple juice; he wasn't sure of his ability to play tight bridge
had it been Happiness.

     During this rubber Hugh noticed that Barbara was squirming a little
and seemed to have trouble in concentrating. When the hand ended he said
quietly, "Trouble, hon?"

     She glanced at Ponse and whispered, "Some. I was about to feed the
boys when I was sent for."

     "Oh." Hugh turned to his host. "Ponse, Barbara needs to stop.,,

     Ponse looked up from shuffling. "Plumbing call? One of the maids
can show it, I suppose. They must go somewhere."

     "Not that. Well, maybe that, too. What I meant was, Barbara has twins."

     "Well? Sluts usually have twins, they have two breasts."

     "That's the point, she's nursing them and she's hours past time.
She has to leave."

     Ponse looked annoyed, hesitated, then said, "Oh, garbage. Its milk
won't cake from so short a delay. Here, cut the cards."

     Hugh did not touch them. Ponse said, "Didn't you hear me?" Hugh
stood up~ His heart was pounding and he felt a shudder of fear. "Ponse,
Barbara hurts. She needs to nurse her twins right now. I can't force you
to let her-but if you think I'll play cards while you don't let her,
you're crazy."

     For long moments the big man stared, without expression. Then
suddenly he grinned. "Hugh, I like you. You did something like this once
before, didn't you? The slut is your sister, I suppose."

 

     "Then you are the one who is crazy. Do you know how close you came
to being cold meat?"

     "I can guess."

     "I doubt it, you don't look worried. But I like spunk, even in a
servant. Very well, I'll have its brats fetched. They can suck while we
play."

     The twins were fetched and Hugh saw at once that they were the
handsomest, healthiest, and loveliest babies that had ever been born; he
told Barbara so. He did not immediately get a chance to touch them as
Ponse took one in each arm, laughed at them, blew in their faces, and
jiggled them. "Fine boys!" he roared. "Fine boys, Barba! Holy little
terrors, I'll bet. Go on, swing that fist, kid! Sock Uncle in the nose
again. What do you call them, Barba? Do they have names?"

     "This one is Hugh-"

     "Eh? Does Hugh have something to do with them? Or thinks he has,
perhaps?"

     "He's 'their father."

     "Well, well! Hugh, you may be ugly, but you have other qualities.
If Barba knows what she's talking about. What's this one's name?"

     "That one is little Joe. Karl Joseph."

     Ponse lifted an eyebrow at Joe. "So you have sluts naming brats for
you, Joe? I'll have to watch you, you're a sly one. What did you give
Barba?"

     "Beg pardon?"

     "Birthing present, you idiot. Give her that ring you're wearing. So
many brats in this house named after me that I have to order trinkets by
the basket load; they know it obliges me to make them a present. Hugh is
lucky, he has nothing to give. Hey, Hughie has teeth!"

     Hugh got to hold them while they settled down for combined bridge
and nursing. Barbara took them one at a time and played cards with her
free hand. The little maids fussed over the one not nursing and, in due
time, took them away. In spite of the handicap Barbara played well, even
brilliantly; the long session ended with Ponse top scorer, Barbara close
behind, and Joe and Hugh tied for last. Hugh had cheated very little to
make it come out that way; the cards had favored Ponse and Barbara when
they were partners; they had made two small slams.

     Ponse was feeling very jovial about it. "Barba, come here, little
one. You tell the slutmaster I said to find a wet nurse for your brats
and that I want the vet to dry you up as soon as possible. I want you
available as my bridge partner. Or opponent-you give a man a tough fight."

     "Yes, sir. May one speak?"

     "One may."

     "I would rather nurse them myself. They're all I have."

     "Well-" He shrugged. "This seems to be my day for balky servants.
I'm afraid you are both still savages. A tingling wouldn't do you any
harm, slut. All right, but you'll have to play 'one-handed sometimes; I
won't have brats stopping the game." He grinned. "Besides, I'd like to
see the little rascals occasionally, especially that one that bites. You
may go. All."

     Barbara was dismissed so suddenly that Hugh barely had time to
exchange smiles with her; he had hoped to walk down with her, steal a
private visit. But His Charity did not dismiss him, so he stayed-with a
warm glow in his heart; it had been the happiest time in a long time.

     Ponse discussed the articles he had been translating, why none of
them offered practical business ventures. "But don't fret, Hugh; keep
plugging and we'll strike ore yet." He turned the talk to other matters,
still kept Hugh there. Hugh found him a knowledgeable conversationalist,
interested in everything, as willing to listen as he was to talk. He
seemed to Hugh the epitome of the perfect decadent gentleman-urbane,
cosmopolitan, disillusioned, and cynical, a dilettante in arts and
sciences, neither merciful nor cruel, unimpressed by his own rank, not
racist-he treated Hugh as an intellectual equal.

     While they were talking, the little maids served dinner to Ponse
and to Joe. Nothing was offered to Hugh, nor did he expect it-nor want
it, as he could have meals served in his rooms if he was not on time in
the executive servants' dining room and he had long since decided, from
samplings, that Memtok was right: the upper servants ate better than the
master.

     But when Ponse had finished, he shoved his dishes toward Hugh. "Eat."

     Hugh hesitated a split second; he did not need to be told that he
was being honored-for a servant. There was plenty, at least three times
as much left as Ponse had eaten. Hugh could not recall that he had ever
eaten someone's leavings, and certainly not with a used spoon. He dug in.

     As usual, Their Charity's menu did not especially please
Hugh-somewhat greasy and he had no great liking for pork. Pork was
hardly ever served belowstairs but was often part of the menus Memtok
sampled, Hugh had noticed. It surprised him, as the revised Koran still
contained the dietary laws and the Chosen did follow some of the
original Muslim customs. They practiced circumcision, did not use
alcohol other than a thin beer, and observed Ramadan at least nominally
and called it that. Mahomet would have been shocked by the revisions to
his straightforward monotheistic teachings but he would have recognized
some of the details.

     But the bread was good, the fruits were superb, and so were the
ices and many other things; it wasn't necessary to dine solely on roast.
Hugh kept intact his record for enjoying the inevitable.

     Ponse was interested in what the climate had been in this region in
Hugh's time. "Joe tells me you sometimes had freezing temperatures. Even
snow."

     "Oh, yes, every winter."

     "Fantastic. How cold did it get?"

     Hugh had to think. He had not had occasion to learn how these
people marked temperatures. "If you consider the range from freezing of
water to boiling, it was not unusual for it to get one third of that
range lower than freezing."

     Ponse looked surprised. "Are you sure? We call that range, freezing
to boiling, one hundred. Are you telling me that it sometimes got as
much as thirty-three degrees below freezing?"

     Hugh noted with interest that the centigrade scale had survived two
millennia-but no reason why not; they used the decimal system in
arithmetic and in money. He had to do a conversion in his head. "Yes,
that's what I mean. Nearly cold enough to freeze mercury, and cold
enough for that, up in those mountains." Hugh pointed out a view window.

     "Cold enough," Joe agreed, "to freeze your teeth! Only thing that
ever made me long for Mississippi."

     "Where," asked Ponse, "is Mississippi?"

     "It's not," Joe told him. "It's under water now. And good riddance."

     This led to discussion of why the climate had changed and Their
Charity sent for the last volume of the Britannica, containing ancient
maps, and for modern maps. They poured over them together. Where the
Mississippi Valley had been, the Gulf now reached far north. Florida and
Yucatan were missing and 'Cuba was a few small islands. California had a
central sea and most of northern Canada was gone.

     Similar shrinkages had taken place elsewhere. The Scandinavian
Peninsula was an island, the British isles were several small islands,
part of the Sahara was under water. What had been lowlands anywhere were
missing-Holland, Belgium, Northern Germany could not be found. Nor
Denmark-the 3altic was a gulf of the Atlantic.

     Hugh looked at it with odd sorrow and had never felt so homesick.
He had known it was so, from reading; this was the first map he had seen
of it.

     "The question," said Ponse, "is whether the melting of ice ~vas
triggered by the dust of the East-West War, or was it a natural change
that was, at most, speeded up a little by artificial events? Some of my
scientists say one thing, some the other."

     "What do you think?" asked Hugh.

     The lord shrugged. "I'm not foolish enough to hold opinions when I
have insufficient data; I'll leave that folly to scientists. I'm simply
glad that Uncle saw fit 'to let me live in an age in which I can go
outdoors without freezing my feet. I visited the South Pole once-I have
some mines there. Frost on the ground. Dreadful. The place for ice is in
a drink."

     Ponse went to the window and stood looking out at the silhouette of
mountains against darkening sky. "However, if it got that cold up there
now, we would root them out in a hurry. Eh, Joe?"

     "Back they would come with their tails between their legs," Joe agreed.

     Hugh looked puzzled. "Ponse means," Joe explained, "the runners
hiding up in the mountains. What they thought you were when we were found."

     "Runners and a few aborigines," Ponse supplemented. "Savages. Poor
creatures who have never been rescued by civilization. It's hard to save
them, Hugh. They don't stand around waiting to be picked up the way you
did. They're crafty as wolves. The merest shadow in the sky and they
freeze and you can't see them-and they are very destructive of game. Of
course we could smoke them out any number of ways. But that would kill
the game, can't have that. Hugh, you've lived out there; you must have
acquired some feel for it. How would you go about rescuing those
critters? Without killing game."

     Mr. Hugh Farnham hesitated only long enough to phrase his reply.
"Their Charity knows that this one is a servant. This one's ears must be
at fault in thinking that it heard its humble self called on to see the
problem as it might appear to the Chosen."

     "Why, damn your impudence! Come, come, Hugh, I want your opinion."

     "You got my opinion, Ponse. I'm a servant. My sympathies are with
the runaways. And the savages. I didn't come here willingly. I was dragged."

     "Surely you aren't resenting that now? Of course you were captured,
even Joe was. But there was language difficulty. Now you've seen the
difference. You know."

     "Yes, I know."

     "Then you know how much your condition has improved. Don't you
sleep in a better bed now? Aren't you eating better? Uncle! When we
picked you up, you were half starved and infested with vermin. You were
barely staying alive with the hardest sort of work, I could see. I'm not
blind, I'm not stupid; there isn't a member of my Family down to 'the
lowest cleaner that works half as 'hard as you had to, or sleeps in as
poor a bed-and in a stinking little sty; I could hardly bear the stench
before we fumigated it-and as for the food, if that is the word, any
servant in this house would turn up his nose at what you ate. Isn't all
that true?"

     "Yes."

     "Well?"

     "I prefer freedom."

     "'Freedom!'" Their Charity snorted. "A concept without a referent,
like 'ghosts.' Meaningless. Hugh, you should study semantics. Modern
semantics, I mean; I doubt if they really had such a science in your
day. We are all free-to walk our appointed paths. Just as a stone is
free to fall when you toss it into the air. No one is free in the
abstract meaning you give the word. Do you think 1 am free? Free to
change places with you, say? Would I if I could? You bet I would! You
have no concept of the worries I have, the work I do. Sometimes I lie
awake half the night, worrying which way to turn next-you won't find
that in servants' hall. They're happy, they have no worries. But I have
to carry my burden as best I can."

     Hugh looked stubborn. Ponse came over and put his arm around Hugh's
shoulders. "Come, let's talk this over judicially-two civilized beings.
I'm not one of those superstitious persons who thinks a servant can't
think because his skin is pale. Surely you know that. Haven't I
respected your intellect?"

     "Well . . . yes."

     "That's better. Let me explain some things-Joe has seen them-and
you can ask questions, and we'll arrive at a rational understanding.
First-Joe, you've seen Chosen here and there who are what our friend
Hugh would no doubt describe as 'free.' Tell him."

     Joe snorted. "Hugh, you should see-and you would be glad to be
privileged to live in Ponse's household. There is just one phrase I can
think of to describe them. Po' black trash. Like the white trash there
used to be in Mississippi. Poor black trash, not knowing where their
next meal is."

     "I follow you."

     "I think I do, too," agreed Their Charity. "A pungent phrase. I
look forward to the day when every man will have servants. It can't come
overnight, they'll have to lift themselves up. But a day when all the
Chosen will be served-and all servants as well cared for as they are in
my own Family. That's my ideal. In the meantime I do the best I can. I
look after their welfare from birth until they're called Home by Uncle.
They have nothing to fear, utter security-which they wouldn't have out
in those mountains as I'm sure you know better than I. They are happy,
they are never overworked- which I am-and they have plenty of fun, which
is more than I can say! This bridge game today-the first real fun I've
had in a month. And they are never punished, only just enough to remind
them when they err. Have to do that, you've seen how stupid most of them
are. Not that I am inferring that you are- No, I tell you honestly that
I think you are smart enough to take care of servants yourself, despite
your skin. I'm speaking of the ordinary run. Honestly, Hugh, do you
think they could take care of themselves as well as I look out for them?"

     "Probably not." Hugh had heard all this before, only nights ago,
and in almost the same words-from Memtok. With the difference that Ponse
seemed to be honestly fond of his servants and earnest about their
welfare-whereas the Chief Domestic had been openly contemptuous of them,
even more strongly so than his veiled contempt for the Chosen. "No, they
couldn't, most of them."

     "Ah! You agree with me."

     "No."

     Ponse looked pained. "Hugh, how can we have a rational discussion
if you say one thing and contradict it in the next breath?"

