 
                                Time Patrolman
 
Time Patrolman
 
 
 
Copyright ©1983 by Poul Anderson
 
e-book ver. 1.0
 
 
 
To Victor Fernandez-Davila
 
IVORY, AND APES, AND PEACOCKS
 
 
 
While Solomon was in all his glory and the Temple was a-building, Manse
Everard came to Tyre of the purple. Almost at once, he was in peril of his
life.
 
That mattered little in itself. An agent of the Time Patrol was expendable,
the more so if he or she enjoyed the godlike status of Unattached. Those whom
Everard sought could destroy an entire reality. He had come to help rescue it.
 
One afternoon, 950 B.C., the ship that bore him approached his destination.
The weather was warm, nearly windless. Sail furled, the vessel moved under
manpower, creak and splash of sweeps, drumbeat of a coxswain posted near the
sailors who had the twin steering oars. Around the broad seventy-foot hull,
wavelets glittered blue, chuckled, swirled. Farther out, dazzlement off the
water blurred sight of other craft upon it. They were numerous, ranging from
lean warships to tublike rowboats. Most were Phoenician, though many hailed
from different city-states of that society. Some were quite foreign,
Philistine, Assyrian, Achaean, or stranger yet; trade through the known world
flowed in and out of Tyre.
 
"Well, Eborix," said Captain Mago genially, "there you have her, queen of the
sea like I told you she is, eh? What d'you think of my town?"
 
He stood in the bows with his passenger, just behind a fishtail ornament that
curled upward and aft toward its mate at the stern. Lashed to that figurehead
and to the latticework rails which ran down either side was a clay jar as big
as himself. The oil was still within it; there had been no need to calm any
billows, as easily as the voyage from Sicily had gone.
 
Everard glanced down at the skipper. Mago was a typical Phoenician, slender,
swarthy, hooknosed, eyes large and a bit slant, cheekbones high; neatly
bearded, he wore a red-and-yellow kaftan, conical hat, sandals. The Patrolman
towered over him. Since he would be conspicuous whatever guise he assumed,
Everard took the part of a Celt from central Europe, complete with breeches,
tunic, bronze sword, and sweeping mustache.
 
"A grand sight, indeed, indeed," he replied in a diplomatic, heavily accented
voice. The electro-cram he had taken, uptime in his native America, could
have given him flawless Punic, but that wouldn't have fitted his character;
he settled for fluency. "Daunting, almost, to a simple backwoodsman."
 
His gaze went forward again. Truly, in its way Tyre was as impressive as New
York-perhaps more, when you recalled how much King Hiram had accomplished in
how short a span, with only the resources of an Iron Age that was not yet
very old.
 
Starboard the mainland rose toward the Lebanon Mountains. It was
summer-tawny, save where orchards and woodlots spotted it with green or
villages nestled. The appearance was richer, more inviting than when Everard
had seen it on his future travels, before he joined the Patrol.
 
Usu, the original city, lay along the shore. Except for its size, it was
representative of the milieu, adobe buildings blocky and flat-roofed, streets
narrow and twisty, a few vivid fa9ades indicating temple or palace.
Battlemented walls and towers ringed three sides of it. Along the docks,
gates between warehouses let those double as defenses. An aqueduct ran in
from heights beyond Everard's view.
 
The new city, Tyre itself-Sor to its dwellers, meaning "Rocks" -was on an
island half a mile offshore. Rather, it covered what had been two skerries
until men filled in between and around them. Later they dug a canal straight
through, from north to south, and flung out jetties and breakwaters to make
this whole region an incomparable haven. With a burgeoning population and a
bustling commerce thus crowded together, houses climbed upward, story upon
story until they loomed over the guardian walls like small skyscrapers. They
seemed to be less often of brick than of stone and cedarwood. Where earth and
plaster had been used, frescos or inlaid shells ornamented them. On the
eastward side, Everard glimpsed a huge and noble structure which the king had
had built not for himself but for civic uses. Mago's ship was bound for the
outer or southern port, the Egyptian Harbor as he called it. Its piers
bustled, men loading, unloading, fetching, bearing off, repairing,
outfitting, dickering, arguing, chaffering, a tumble and chaos that somehow
got its jobs done. Dock wallopers, donkey drivers, and other laborers, like
the seamen on this cargo-cluttered deck, wore merely loincloths, or kaftans
faded and patched. But plenty of brighter garments were in sight, some
flaunting the costly colors that were produced here. Occasional women passed
among the men, and Everard's preliminary education told him that they weren't
all hookers. Sound rolled out to meet him, talk, laughter, shouts, braying,
neighing, footfalls, hoof-beats, hammerbeats, groan of wheels and cranes,
twanging music. The vitality was well-nigh overwhelming.
 
Not that this was any prettified scene in an Arabian Nights movie. Already he
made out beggars crippled, blind, starveling; he saw a lash touch up a slave
who toiled too slowly; beasts of burden fared worse. The smells of the
ancient East roiled forth, smoke, dung, offal, sweat, as well as tar, spices,
and savory roastings. Added to them was a stench of dyeworks and murex-shell
middens on the mainland; but sailing along the coast and camping ashore every
night, he had gotten used to that by now.
 
He didn't take the drawbacks to heart. His farings through history had cured
him of fastidiousness and case-hardened him to the cruelties of man and
nature - somewhat. For their era, these Canaanites were an enlightened and
happy people. In fact, they were more so than most of humanity almost
everywhere and every when.
 
His task was to keep them that way.
 
Mago hauled his attention back. "Aye, there are those who'd shamelessly
swindle an innocent newcomer. I don't want that to happen to you, Eborix, my
friend. I've grown to like you as we traveled, and I want you to think well
of my town. Let me show you to an inn that a brother-in-law of mine has
-brother of my junior wife, he is. He'll give you a clean doss and safe
storage for your valuables at a fair exchange."
 
"It's thankful to you I am," Everard replied, "but my thought was I'd seek
out that landsman I've bespoken. Remember, 'twas his presence emboldened me
to fare hither." He smiled. "Sure, and if he's died or moved away or
whatever, glad I'll be to take your offer." That was mere politeness. The
impression he had gathered along the way was that Mago was as cheerfully
rapacious as any other merchant adventurer, and hoped to get him plucked.
 
The captain regarded him for a moment. Everard counted as big in his own era,
which made him gigantic here. A dented nose in the heavy features added to
the impression of toughness, while blue eyes and dark-brown hair bespoke the
wild North. One had better not push Eborix too hard.
 
At the same time, the Celtic persona was no great wonder in this cosmopolitan
place. Not only did amber come from the Baltic littoral; tin from Iberia,
condiments from Arabia, hardwoods from Africa, occasional wares from farther
still: men did.
 
Engaging passage, Eborix had told of leaving his mountainous homeland because
of losing out in a feud, to seek his fortune in the South. Wandering, he had
hunted or worked for his keep, when he didn't receive hospitality in return
for his tales. He fetched up among the Umbrians of Italy, who were akin to
him. (The Celts would not begin overrunning Europe, clear to the Atlantic,
for another three centuries or so, when they had become familiar with iron;
but already some had won territory far from the Danube Valley that was the
cradle of their race.) One of them, who had served as a mercenary, described
opportunities in Canaan and taught Eborix the Punic tongue. This induced the
latter to seek a bay in Sicily where Phoenician traders regularly called and
buy passage with goods he had acquired. A man from his area of birth was said
to be living in Tyre, after an adventurous career of his own, and probably
willing to steer a compatriot in a profitable direction.
 
This line of bull, carefully devised by Patrol specialists, did more than
slake local curiosity. It made Everard's trip safe. Had they supposed the
foreigner to be a waif with no connections, Mago and the crew might have been
tempted to set upon him while he slept, bind him, and sell him for a slave.
As was, the journey had been interesting, yes, rather fun. Everard had come
to like these rascals.
 
That doubled his wish to save them from ruin.
 
The Tyrian sighed. "As you wish," he said. "If you do need me, my home is on
the Street of Anat's Temple, near the Sidonian Harbor." He brightened. "In
any case, do come look me up, you and your host. He's in the amber trade, you
mentioned? Maybe we can work out a little deal of some kind. . . . Now, stand
aside. I've got to bring us in." He shouted profane commands.
 
Deftly, the sailors laid their vessel along a quay, got it secured, put out a
gangplank. Folk swarmed close, yelling for news, crying for stevedore work,
chanting the praises of their wares or of their masters' business
establishments. None boarded, however. That prerogative belonged initially to
the customs officer. A guard, helmeted, scale-mailed, armed with spear and
shortsword, went before him, pushing a way through the crowd, leaving a wake
of fairly good-natured curses. At the officer's back trotted a secretary, who
bore a stylus and waxed tablet.
 
Everard went below decks and fetched his baggage, which he had stowed among
the blocks of Italian marble that were the ship's principal cargo. The
officer required him to open the two leather sacks. Nothing surprising was in
them. The whole purpose of traveling all the way from Sicily, instead of
time-hopping directly here, was to pass the Patrolman off as what he claimed
to be. It was well-nigh certain that the enemy was keeping watch on events,
as they neared the moment of catastrophe.
 
"You can provide for yourself a while, at least." The Phoenician official
nodded his grizzled head when Everard displayed some small ingots of bronze.
Coinage would not be invented for_several centuries, but the metal could be
swapped for whatever he wanted. "You must understand that we cannot let in
one who might feel he has to turn robber. In fact - " He looked dubiously at
the barbarian sword. "What is your purpose in coming?"
 
"To find honest work, sir, as it might be a caravan guard. I'll be seeking
out Conor the amber factor." The existence of that resident Celt had been a
major reason for Everard's adoption of his specific disguise. The chief of
the local Patrol base had suggested it.
 
The Tyrian reached a decision. "Very well, you may go ashore, your weapon
too. Remember that we crucify thieves, bandits, and murderers. If you fail to
get other work, seek out Ithobaal's hiring house, near the Hall of the
Suffetes. He can always find something in the way of day labor for a husky
fellow like you. Good luck."
 
He returned to dealing with Mago. Everard lingered, awaiting a chance to bid
the captain farewell. Discussion went quickly, almost informally, and the tax
to be paid in kind would be modest. This race of businessmen had no use for
the ponderous bureaucracy of Egypt or Mesopotamia.
 
Having said what he wanted to, Everard picked up his bags by the cords around
them and went ashore. The crowd surged about him, staring, chattering. At
first he was amazed; after a couple of tentative approaches, nobody begged
alms or beset him to buy trinkets. Could this be the Near East?
 
He recalled the absence of money. A newcomer wouldn't likely have anything
corresponding to small change. Usually you made a bargain with an innkeeper,
food and lodging for so-and-so much of the metal, or whatever else of value,
you carried. For lesser purchases, you sawed a piece off an ingot, unless
some different trade was arranged. (Everard's fund included amber and nacre
beads.) Sometimes you called in a broker, who made your transaction part of a
complicated one involving several other individuals. If you felt charitable,
you'd carry around a little grain or dried fruit and drop it in the bowls of
the indigent.
 
Everard soon left most of the people behind. They were mainly interested in
the crew. A few idle curiosity-seekers, and many stares, trailed him. He
strode over the quay toward an open gate.
 
A hand plucked his sleeve. Startled enough to miss a step, he looked down.
 
A brown-skinned boy grinned back. He was sixteen or so, to judge from the
fuzz on his cheeks, though small and scrawny even by local standards.
Nonetheless, he moved lithely, barefoot, clad only in a ragged and begrimed
kilt at which hung a pouch. Curly black hair fell in a queue behind a
sharp-nosed, sharp-chinned face. His smile and his eyes - big, long-lashed
Levantine eyes - were brilliant.
 
"Hail, sir, hail to you!" he greeted. "Life, health, and strength be yours!
Welcome to Tyre! Where would you go, sir, and what can I do for you?"
 
He didn't burble, but spoke very clearly, in hopes the stranger would
understand. When he got a response in his own language, he jumped for joy.
"What do you want, lad?"
 
"Why, sir, to be your guide, your advisor, your helper, and, yes, your
guardian. Alas, our otherwise fair city is afflicted with scoundrels who 1ike
nothing better than to prey on innocent newcomers. If they do not outright
steal everything you have, the first time you blink, they'll at least wish
the most worthless trash on you, at a cost which'll leave you paupered almost
as fast - "
 
The boy broke off. He had spied a seedy-looking young man approach. At once
he sped to intercept, windmilling his fists, yelling too quickly and shrilly
for Everard to catch more than a few words. " - louse-bitten jackal! ... I
saw him first. . . . Begone to the latrine that spawned you - "
 
The young man stiffened. He reached for a knife hung at his shoulder. Hardly
had he moved before the stripling snatched a sling from his pouch and a rock
to load it. He crouched, leered, swung the leather strap to and fro. The man
spat, said something nasty, turned on his heel, and stalked off. Laughter
barked from such passersby as had paid attention.
 
The boy laughed too, gleefully, loping back to Everard. "Now that, sir, was a
prime example of what I meant," he crowed. "I know yon villain well. He's a
runner for his father-maybe his father -who keeps the inn at the Sign of the
Blue Squid. There you'd be lucky to get a rotten piece of goat's tail for
your dinner, the single wench is a shambling farm of diseases, the pallets
hang together only because the bedbugs hold hands, and as for the wine, why,
I think the wench must have infected somebody's horse. You'd soon be too sick
to notice that grandsire of a thousand hyenas when he plundered your baggage,
and if you sought to complain, he'd swear by every god in the universe that
you gambled it away. Little does he fear hell after this world is rid of him;
he knows they'd never demean themselves there by letting him in. That is what
I've saved you from, great lord."
 
Everard felt a grin tug at his lips. "Well, son, you might be stretching
things just a trifle," he said.
 
The boy smote his thin breast. "No more than needful to give your
magnificence the proper impression. Surely you are a man of the widest
experience, a judge of the best as well as a generous rewarder of faithful
service. Come, let me bring you to lodgings, or whatever else you may desire,
and then see for yourself whether or not Pummairam has led you aright."
 
Everard nodded. The map of Tyre was engraved in his memory; he had no need of
a guide. However, it would be natural for a yokel to engage one. Also, this
kid would keep others from pestering him, and might give him a few useful
tips.
 
"Very well, lead me whither I would go. Your name is Pummairam?"
 
"Yes, sir." Since the youth didn't mention his father, as was customary, he
probably didn't know who that had been. "May I ask how my noble master should
be addressed by his humble servant?"
 
"No title. I am Eborix, son of Mannoch, from a country beyond the Achaeans."
With none of Mago's folk listening, the Patrolman could add: "He whom I seek
is Zakarbaal of Sidon, who deals for his kin in this city." That meant
Zakarbaal represented his family firm among the Tyrians, and handled its
affairs here in between visits by its ships. "I've heard tell his house is
on, uh, the Street of the Chandlers. Can you be showing me the way?"
 
"Indeed, indeed." Pummairam took Everard's bags. "Only deign to accompany me."
 
Actually, it wasn't hard to get around. As a planned city, rather than one
which had grown organically through centuries, Tyre was laid out more or less
on a gridiron pattern. The thoroughfares were paved, guttered, and reasonably
wide, considering how short of acreage the island was. They lacked sidewalks,
but that didn't matter, because except for a few trunk routes, beasts of
burden were not allowed on them outside the wharf areas; nor did people dump
stuff on them. They also lacked signs, of course, but that didn't matter
either, since almost anybody would have been glad to give directions for the
sake of some words with an outlander and perhaps a deal to propose.
 
Walls rose sheer to right and left, mostly win-dowless, enclosing the
inward-looking houses that would prevail in Mediterranean countries for
millennia to come. They shut off breezes and radiated back the heat of the
sun. Noise echoed off them, odors rolled thick between. Yet Everard found
himself enjoying the place. Still more than at the waterfront, crowds moved,
jostled, gestured, laughed, talked at machine-gun speed, chanted, clamored.
Porters beneath their yokes, litter-bearers conveying the occasional wealthy
burgher, forced a way among sailors, artisans, vendors, laborers, housewives,
entertainers, mainland farmers and shepherds, foreigners from end to end of
the Midworld Sea, every variety and condition of life. If most clothes were
of dull hue, many were gaudy, and none seemed to cover a body that was not
overflowing with energy.
 
Booths lined the walls. Everard couldn't resist lingering now and then, to
look at what they offered. That did not include the famous purple dye; it was
too expensive, sought after by gar-mentmakers everywhere, destined to become
the traditional color of royalty. But there was no dearth of bright fabrics,
draperies, rugs. Glassware abounded, anything from beads to beakers; it was
another specialty of the Phoenicians, their own invention. Jewelry and
figurines, often carved in ivory or cast in precious metals, were excellent;
this culture originated little or nothing artistic, but copied freely and
skillfully. Amulets, charms, gewgaws, food, drink, utensils, weapons,
instruments, games, toys, endlessness -
 
Everard remembered how the Bible gloated (would gloat) over the wealth of
Solomon, and whence he got it. "For the king had at sea a navy of Tharshish
with the navy of Hiram: once in three years came the navy of Tharshish,
bringing gold, and silver, ivory, and apes, and peacocks. - "
 
Pummairam was quick to switch off conversations with shopkeepers and start
Everard onward. "Let me show my master where the really good stuff is."
Doubtless that meant a commission for Pummairam, but what the hell, the
youngster had to live somehow, and didn't seem ever to have lived terribly
well.
 
For a while they followed the canal. To a bawdy chant, sailors towed a laden
ship along. Its officers stood on deck, wrapped in the dignity that behooved
businessmen. The Phoenician bourgeoisie tended to be a sober lot... except
in- their religion, some of whose rites were orgiastic enough to compensate.
 
The Street of the Chandlers led off from this waterway. It was fairly long,
being hemmed in by massive buildings that were warehouses as well as offices
and homes. It was quiet, too, despite its far end giving on a thronged
avenue; no shops crouched against the high, hot walls, and few people were in
sight. Captains and shipowners came here for supplies, merchants came to
negotiate, and, yes, two monoliths flanked the entrance of a small temple
dedicated to Tanith, Our Lady of the Waves. Several little children who must
belong to resident families - boys and girls together, naked or nearly so -
darted about at play while a gaunt, excited mongrel dog barked.
 
A beggar sat, knees drawn up, by the shady entrance to an alley. His bowl
rested at his bare feet. A kaftan muffled his body and a cowl obscured his
face. Everard did see the rag tied over the eyes. Poor, blind devil;
ophthalmia was among the countless damnations that made the ancient world not
so glamorous after all. . . . Pummairam darted past the fellow, to overtake a
man in a priestly robe who was leaving the temple. "Hoy, sir, your reverence,
if you please," he called, "which is the door of Zakarbaal the Sidonian? My
master condescends to visit him -" Everard, who already knew the answer,
lengthened his stride to follow.
 
The beggar rose. His left hand plucked away his bandage, to reveal a lean,
thick-bearded visage and a pair of eyes that had surely been watching through
the cloth. From that flowing sleeve, his right hand drew something that
gleamed.
 
A pistol!
 
Reflex flung Everard aside. Pain whipped through his own left shoulder. Sonic
gun, he realized, from futureward of his home era, soundless, recoilless. If
that invisible beam got him in the head or heart, he'd be dead, and never a
mark upon him.
 
No place to go but forward. "Haaa!" he roared, and plunged zigzag to the
attack. His sword hissed forth.
 
The other grinned, drifted back, took careful aim.
 
A smack! resounded. The assassin lurched, yelled, dropped his weapon, grabbed
at his ribs. Pummairam's spent slingstone clattered over the cobbles.
 
Children scattered, screaming. The priest returned prudently through his
temple door. The stranger whirled and ran. He vanished down the lane. Everard
was too slow. His injury wasn't serious, but for the moment it hurt
abominably. Half dazed, he stopped at the alley mouth, stared down the
emptiness before him, panted, and rasped in English, "He's escaped. Oh, God
damn it, anyway."
 
Pummairam darted to him. Anxious hands played over the Patrolman's form. "Are
you wounded, my master? Can your servant help? Ah, woe, woe, I'd no time for
a proper windup, nor to aim right, else I'd have spattered the evildoer's
brains for yon dog to lick up."
 
"You . . . did mighty well . . . just the same." Everard drew shuddering
breaths. Strength and steadiness began to return, agony to recede. He was
still alive. That was miracle enough for one day.
 
He had work to do, though, and urgent it was. Having obtained the gun, he
laid a hand on Pummairam's shoulder and made their gazes meet. "What did you
see, lad? What d'you think happened this while?"
 
"Why, I -I -" Ferret-fast, the youth collected his wits. "It seemed to me
that the beggar, though such he scarcely was, threatened my lord's life with
some talisman whose magic did inflict harm. May the gods pour abominations on
the head of him who would have extinguished the light of the universe! Yet,
naturally, his wickedness could not prevail against the valor of my master -"
the voice dropped to a confidential whisper: "- whose secrets are assuredly
locked away safe in the bosom of his worshipful servant."
 
"Good," Everard grunted. "Sure, and these be matters about which common folk
should never dare talk, lest they be stricken with palsy, deafness, and
emerods. You've done well, Pum." Saved my life, probably, he thought, and
stooped to untie the cord on a fallen bag. "Here, small reward it is, but
this ingot ought to buy you something you'd like. And now, before the
brannigan started, you did learn which is the house I want, did you not?"
 
Underneath the business of the minute, fading pain and shock from the
assault, exhilaration of survival, grimness rose. After all his elaborate
precautions, within an hour of arrival, his cover was blown. The enemy had
not only had Patrol headquarters staked out, somehow their agent had
instantly seen that it was no ordinary wanderer come into this street, and
had not hesitated a second before trying to kill him.
 
This was a hairy mission for sure. And more was at stake than Everard liked
to think about - first the existence of Tyre, later the destiny of the world.
 
Zakarbaal closed the door to his inner chambers and latched it. Turning
around, he held out his hand in the manner of Western civilization.
"Welcome," he said in Temporal, the Patrol language. "My name, you may
remember, is Chaim Zorach. May I present my wife Yael?"
 
They were both of Levantine appearance and in Canaanite garb, but here, shut
away from office staff and household servants, their entire bearing changed,
posture, gait, facial expressions, tone of voice. Everard would have
recognized them as being of the twentieth century even if he had not been
told. The atmosphere was as refreshing to him as a wind off the sea.
 
He introduced himself. "I am the Unattached agent you sent for," he added.
 
Yael Zorach's eyes widened. "Oh! An honor. You . . . you are the first such I
have met. The others who've been investigating, they are just technicians."
 
Everard grimaced. "Don't be too awe-struck. I'm afraid I haven't made much of
a showing so far."
 
He described his journey and the contretemps at its end. She offered him some
painkiller, but he said he was pretty well over hurting, and her husband
thereupon produced what was better anyway, a bottle of Scotch. Presently they
were seated at their ease.
 
The chairs were comfortable, not unlike those of home-a luxury in this
milieu, but then, Zakarbaal was supposed to be a wealthy man, with access to
every kind of imported goods. Otherwise the apartment was austere by future
standards, though frescos, draperies, lamps, furnishings were tasteful.
 
It was cool and dim; a window opening on a small cloister garden had been
curtained against the heat of the day.
 
"Why don't we relax a while and get acquainted before we buckle down to
duty?" Everard suggested.
 
Zorach scowled. "You can do that right after you almost got killed?"
 
His wife smiled. "I think he might need to all the more, dear," she murmured.
"We too. The menace can wait a little longer. It's been waiting, hasn't it?"
 
From the pouch at his belt, Everard drew anachronisms he had permitted
himself, hitherto used only in solitude: pipe, tobacco, lighter. Zorach's
tension eased a trifle, he chuckled and fetched cigarettes out of a locked
coffer which held various such comforts. His language changed to
Brooklyn-accented English: "You're American, aren't you, Agent Everard?"
 
"Yes. Recruited in 1954." How many years of his lifespan had passed "since"
he answered an ad, took certain tests, and learned of an organization that
guarded a traffic through the epochs? He hadn't added them up lately. It
didn't matter much, when he and his fellows were the beneficiaries of a
treatment that kept them unaging. "Uh, I thought you two were Israelis."
 
"We are," Zorach explained. "In fact, Yael's a sabra. Me, though, I didn't
immigrate till I'd been doing archaeology there for a spell and had met her.
That was in 1971. We got recruited into the Patrol four years later."
 
"How'd that happen, if I may ask?"
 
"We were approached, sounded out, finally told the truth. Naturally, we
jumped at the chance. The work's often hard and lonesome - twice as lonesome,
in a way, when we're home on furlough and can't tell our old friends and
colleagues what we've been up to - but it's totally fascinating." Zorach
winced. His words became a near mumble. "Also, well, this post is special for
us. We don't just maintain a base and its cover business, we manage to help
local people now and then. Or we try to, as much as we can without causing
anybody to suspect there's anything peculiar about us. That makes up,
somehow, a little bit, for ... for what our countrymen will do hereabouts,
far uptime."
 
Everard nodded. The pattern was familiar to him. Most field agents were
specialists like these, passing their careers in a single milieu. They had to
be, if they were to learn it thoroughly enough to serve the Patrol's
purposes. What a help it would be to have native-born personnel! But such
were very rare before the eighteenth century A.D., or still later in most
parts of the world. How could a person who hadn't grown up in a
scientific-industrial society even grasp the idea of automatic machinery, let
alone vehicles that jumped in a blink from place to place and year to year?
An occasional genius, of course; however, most identifiable geniuses carved
niches for themselves in history, and you didn't dare tell them the facts for
fear of making changes. . . .
 
"Yeah," Everard said. "In a way, a free operative like me has it easier.
Husband-and-wife teams, or women generally - Not to pry, but what do you do
about children?"
 
"Oh, we have two at home in Tel Aviv," Yael Zorach answered. "We time our
returns so we've never been gone from them for more than a few days of their
lives." She sighed. "It is strange, of course, when to us months have
passed." Brightening: "Well, when they're of age, they're going to join the
outfit too. Our regional recruiter has examined them already and decided
they'll be fine material."
 
If not, Everard thought, could you stand it, watching them grow old, suffer
the horrors that will come, finally die, while you are still young of body?
Such a prospect had made him shy away from marriage, more than once.
 
"I think Agent Everard means children here in Tyre," Chaim Zorach said.
"Before traveling from Sidon - we took ship, like you, because we were going
to become moderately conspicuous - we quietly bought a couple of infants from
a slave dealer, took them along, and have been passing them off as ours.
They'll have lives as good as we can arrange." Unspoken was the likelihood
that servants had the actual raising of those two; their foster parents would
not dare invest much love in them. "That keeps us from appearing somehow
unnatural. If my wife's womb has since closed, why, it's a common misfortune.
I do get twitted about not taking a second wife or at least a concubine, but
on the whole, Phoenicians mind their own business pretty well."
 
"You like them, then?" Everard inquired.
 
"Oh, yes, by and large, we do. We have excellent friends among them. We'd
better - as important a nexus as this is."
 
Everard frowned and puffed hard on his pipe. The bowl had grown consolingly
warm in his clasp, aglow like a tiny hearthfire. "You think that's correct?"
 
The Zorachs were surprised. "Of course!" Yael said. "We know it is. Didn't
they explain to you?"
 
Everard chose his words with care. "Yes and no. After I'd been asked to look
into this matter, and agreed, I got myself crammed full of information about
the milieu. In a way, too full; it became hard to see the forest for the
trees. However, my experience has been that I do best to avoid grand
generalizations in advance of a mission. It could get hard to see the trees
for the forest, so to speak. My idea was, once I'd been dropped off in Sicily
and taken ship for Tyre, I'd have leisure to digest the information and form
my own ideas. But that didn't quite work out, because the captain and crew
were infernally curious about me; my mental energy went into answering their
questions, which were often sharp, without letting any cat out of the bag."
He paused. "To be sure, the role of Phoenicia in general, and Tyre in
particular, in Jewish history - that's obvious."
 
On the kingdom that David had cobbled together out of Israel, Judah, and
Jerusalem, this city soon became the main civilizing influence, its principal
trading partner and window on the outside world. Now Solomon continued his
father's friendship with Hiram. The Tyrians were supplying most of the
materials and nearly all the skilled hands for the building of the Temple, as
well as structures less famous. They would embark on joint exploratory and
commercial ventures with the Hebrews. They would advance an immensity of
goods to Solomon, a debt which he could only pay off by ceding them a score
of his villages . . . with whatever subtle long-range consequences that had.
 
The subtleties went deeper, though. Phoenician customs, thoughts, beliefs
permeated the neighboring realm, for good or ill; Solomon himself made
sacrifices to gods of theirs. Yahweh would not really be the sole Lord of the
Jews until the Babylonian Captivity forced them to it, as a means of
preserving an identity that ten of their tribes had already lost. Before
then, King Ahab of Israel would have taken the Tyrian princess Jezebel as his
queen. Their evil memory was undeserved; the policy of foreign alliance and
domestic religious tolerance which they strove to carry out might well have
saved the country from its eventual destruction. Unfortunately, they collided
with fanatical Elijah - "the mad mullah from the mountains of Gilead,"
Trevor-Roper would call him. And yet, had not Phoenician paganism spurred
them to fury, would the prophets have wrought that faith which was to endure
for thousands of years and remake the world?
 
"Oh, yes," Chaim said. "The Holy Land's aswarm with visitors. Jerusalem Base
is chronically swamped, trying to regulate the traffic. We get a lot fewer
here, mostly scientists from different eras, traders in artwork and the like,
the occasional rich tourist. Nevertheless, sir, I maintain that this place,
Tyre, is the real nexus of the era." Harshly: "And our opponents seem to have
reached the same conclusion, right?"
 
The starkness took hold of Everard. Precisely because the fame of Jerusalem,
in future eyes, overshadowed that of Tyre, this station was still worse
undermanned than most; therefore it was terribly vulnerable; and if indeed it
was a root of the morrow, and that root was cut away -
 
The facts passed before him as vividly as if he had never known them before.
 
When humans built their first time machine, long after Everard's home
century, the Danellian supermen had arrived from farther yet, to organize the
police force of the temporal lanes. It would gather knowledge, furnish
guidance, aid the distressed, curb the wrongdoer; but these benevolences were
incidental to its real function, which was to preserve the Danellians. A man
has not lost free will merely because he has gone into the past. He can
affect the course of events as much as ever. True, they have their momentum,
and it is enormous. Minor fluctuations soon even out. For instance, whether a
certain ordinary individual has lived long or died young, flourished or not,
will make no noticeable difference several generations later. Unless that
individual was, say, Shalmaneser or Genghis Khan or Oliver Cromwell or V. I.
Lenin; Gautama Buddha or Kung Fu-Tze or Paul of Tarsus or Muhammad ibn
Abdallah; Aristotle or Galileo or Newton or Einstein-Change anything like
that, traveler from tomorrow, and you will still be where you are, but the
people who brought you forth do not exist, they never did, it is an entirely
other Earth up ahead, and you and your memories bespeak the uncausality, the
ultimate chaos, which lairs beneath the cosmos.
 
Before now, along his own world line, Everard had had to stop the reckless
and the ignorant before they worked that kind of havoc. They weren't too
common; after all, the societies which possessed time travel screened their
emissaries pretty carefully as a rule. However, in the course of a million
years or more, mistakes were bound to happen.
 
So were crimes.
 
Everard spoke slowly: "Before going into detail about that gang and its
operation -"
 
"What pitiful few details we have," Chaim Zorach muttered.
 
"- I'd like some idea of what their reasoning was. Why did they pick Tyre for
the victim? Aside from its relationship to the Jews, that is."
 
"Well," Zorach began, "for openers, consider political events futureward of
today. Hiram's become the most powerful king in Canaan, and that strength
will outlive him. Tyre will stand off the Assyrians when they come, with
everything that that implies. It'll push seaborne trade as far as Britain.
It'll found colonies, the main one being Carthage." (Everard's mouth
tightened. He had cause to know, far too well, how much Carthage mattered in
history.) "It'll submit to the Persians, but fairly willingly, and among
other things provide most of their fleet when they attack Greece. That effort
will fail, of course, but imagine how the world might have gone if the Greeks
had not faced that particular challenge. Eventually Tyre will fall to
Alexander the Great, but only after a siege of months - a delay in his
progress that also has incalculable consequences.
 
"Meanwhile, more basically, as the leading Phoenician state, it will be in
the forefront of spreading Phoenician ideas abroad. Yes, to the Greeks
themselves. There are religious concepts - Aphrodite, Adonis, Herakles, and
other figures originate as Phoenician divinities. There's the alphabet, a
Phoenician invention. There's the knowledge of Europe, Africa, Asia that
Phoenician navigators will bring back. There's the progress in shipbuilding
and seamanship."
 
Enthusiasm kindled in his tone: "Above everything else, I'd say, there's the
origin of democracy, of the worth and rights of the individual. Not that the
Phoenicians have any such theories; philosophy, like art, never will be a
strong point of theirs. Just the same, the merchant adventurer - explorer or
entrepreneur - he's their ideal, a man out on his own, deciding for himself.
Here at home, Hiram's no traditional Egyptian or Oriental god-king. He
inherited his job, true, but essentially he presides over the suffetes -the
magnates, who must approve every important thing he does. Tyre is actually
quite a bit like the medieval Venetian republic in its heyday.
 
"We don't have the scientific personnel to trace the process out step by
step, no. But I'm convinced that the Greeks developed their democratic
institutions under strong Phoenician influence, mainly Tyrian - and where
will your country or mine get those ideas from, if not the Greeks?"
 
Zorach's fist smote the arm of his chair. His other hand brought the whisky
to his lips for a long and fiery gulp. "That's what those devils have
learned!" he exclaimed. "They're holding Tyre up for ransom because that's
how to put the future of the whole human race at gunpoint!"
 
 
 
Having broken out a holocube, he showed Everard what would happen, a year
hence.
 
He had taken pictures with a sort of minicamera, actually a molecular
recorder from the twenty-second century, disguised as a gem on a ring. ("Had"
was the ludicrous single way to express in English how he doubled back and
forth in time. The Temporal grammar included appropriate tenses.) Granted, he
was not a priest or acolyte, but as a layman who made generous donations so
that the goddess would favor his ventures, he had access.
 
The explosion took place (would take place) along this very street, in the
little temple of Tanith. Occurring at night, it didn't hurt anybody, but it
wrecked the inner sanctum. Rotating the view, Everard studied cracked and
blackened walls, shattered altar and idol, strewn relics and treasures,
twisted scraps of metal. Horror-numbed hierophants sought to placate the
divine wrath with prayers and offerings, on the site and everywhere else in
town that was sacred.
 
The Patrolman selected a volume of space within the scene and magnified. The
bomb had fragmented its carrier, but there was no mistaking the pieces. A
standard two-seat hopper, such as plied the time lanes in untold thousands,
had materialized, and instantly erupted.
 
"I collected some dust and char when nobody was looking, and sent it uptime
for analysis," Zorach said. "The lab reported the explosive had been chemical
- fulgurite-B, the name is."
 
Everard nodded. "I know that stuff. In common use for a rather long period,
starting a while after the origin span of us three. Therefore easy to obtain
in quantity, untraceably - a hell of a lot easier than nuke isotopes.
Wouldn't need a large amount to do this much damage, either....I suppose
you've had no luck intercepting the machine?"
 
Zorach shook his head. "No. Or rather, the Patrol officers haven't. They went
downtime of the event, planted instruments of every kind that could be
concealed, but - Everything happens too fast."
 
Everard rubbed his chin. The stubble felt almost silky; a bronze razor and a
lack of soap didn't make for a close shave. He thought vaguely that he would
have welcomed some scratchiness, 'or anything else familiar.
 
What had happened was plain enough. The vehicle had been unmanned,
autopiloted, sent from some unknown point of space-time. Startoff had
activated the detonator, so that the bomb arrived exploding. Though Patrol
agents could pinpoint the instant, they could do nothing to head off the
occurrence.
 
Could a technology advanced beyond theirs do so - Danellian, even? Everard
imagined a device planted in advance of the moment, generating a forcefield
which contained the violence when it smote. Well, this had not happened,
therefore it might be a physical impossibility. Likelier, though, the
Danellians stayed their hand because the harm had been done - the saboteurs
could try again - all by itself, such a cat-and-mouse game might warp the
continuum beyond healing - He shivered and asked roughly: "What explanation
will the Tyrians themselves come up with?"
 
"Nothing dogmatic," Yael Zorach replied. "They don't have our kind of
Weltanschauung, remember. To them, the world isn't entirely governed by laws
of nature, it's capricious, changeable, magical."
 
And they're fundamentally right, aren't they? The chill struck deeper into
Everard.
 
"When nothing else of the kind occurs, excitement will die down," she went
on. "The chronicles that record the incident will be lost; besides,
Phoenicians aren't especially given to writing chronicles. They'll think that
somebody did something wrong that provoked a thunderbolt from heaven. Not
necessarily any human; it could have been a quarrel among the gods. Therefore
nobody will become a scapegoat. After a generation or two, the incident will
be forgotten, except perhaps as a bit of folklore."
 
Chaim Zorach fairly snarled: "That's if the extortionists don't do more and
worse."
 
"Yeah, let's see their ransom note," Everard requested.
 
"I have a copy only. The original went uptime for study."
 
"Oh, sure, I know. I've read the lab report. Sepia ink on a papyrus scroll,
no clue there. Found at your door, probably dropped from another unmanned
hopper that just flitted through."
 
"Certainly dropped in that way," Zorach reminded him. "The agents who came in
set up instruments for that night, and detected the machine. It was present
for about a millisecond. They might have tried to capture it, but what would
have been the use? It was bound to be devoid of clues. And in any case, the
effort would have entailed making a racket that could have brought the
neighbors out to see what was going on."
 
He fetched the document for Everard to examine. The Patrolman had pored over
a transcript as part of his briefing, but hoped that sight of the actual hand
would suggest something, anything to him.
 
The words had been formed with a contemporary reed pen, rather skillfully
used. (This implied that the writer was well versed in the milieu, but that
was obvious already.) They were printed, not cursive, though certain
flamboyant flourishes appeared. The language was Temporal.
 
"To the Time Patrol from the Committee for Aggrandizement, greeting." At
least there was none of the cant about being a people's army of national
liberation, such as nauseated Everard in the later part of his home century.
These fellows were frank bandits. Unless, of course, they pretended to be, in
order to cover their tracks the more thoroughly. . . .
 
"Having witnessed the consequences when one small bomb was delivered to a
carefully chosen location in Tyre, you are invited to contemplate the results
of a barrage throughout the city."
 
Once more, heavily, Everard nodded. His opponents were shrewd. A threat to
kill or kidnap individuals - say, King Hiram himself - would have been
nugatory, if not empty. The Patrol would mount guard on any such person. If
somehow an attack succeeded, the Patrol would go back in time and arrange for
the victim to be elsewhere at the moment of the assault; it would make the
event "unhappen." Granted, that involved risks which the outfit hated to
take, and at best would require a lot of work to make sure that the future
did not get altered by the rescue operation itself. Nevertheless, the Patrol
could and would act.
 
But how did you move a whole islandful of buildings to safety? You could,
perhaps, evacuate the population. The town would remain. It wasn't physically
large, after all, no matter how large it loomed in history - about 25,000
people crowded into about 140 acres. A few tons of high explosive would leave
it in ruins. The devastation needn't even be total. After such a terrifying
manifestation of supernatural fury, no one would come back here. Tyre would
crumble away, a ghost town, while all the centuries and millennia, all the
human beings and their lives and civilizations, which it had helped bring
into existence . . . those would be less than ghosts.
 
Everard shivered anew. Don't tell me there is no such thing as absolute evil,
he thought. These creatures - He forced himself to read on:
 
" - The price of our forbearance is quite reasonable, merely a little
information. We desire the data necessary for the construction of a Trazon
matter transmuter - "
 
When that device was being developed, during the Third Technological
Renaissance, the Patrol had covertly manifested itself to the creators,
though they lived downtime of its own founding. Forever afterward, its use -
the very knowledge of its existence, let alone the manner of its making - had
been severely restricted. True, the ability to convert any material object,
be it just a heap of dirt, into any other, be it a jewel or a machine or a
living body, could have spelled unlimited wealth for the entire species. The
trouble was, you could as easily produce unlimited amounts of weapons, or
poisons, or radioactive atoms. . . .
 
"- You will broadcast the data in digital form from Palo Alto, California,
United States of America, throughout the 24 hours of Friday 13 June 1980. The
waveband to employ . . . the digital code. . . . Your receipt will be the
continued reality of your time line. -"
 
That was smart, too. The message wasn't one that would be picked up
accidentally by some native, yet electronic activity in the Silicon Valley
area was so great as to rule out any possibility of tracking down a receiver.
 
"- We will not use the device upon the planet Earth. Therefore the Time
Patrol need not fear that it is compromising its Prime Directive by this
helpfulness to us. On the contrary, you have no other way to preserve
yourselves, do you?
 
"Our compliments, and our expectations."
 
No signature.
 
"The broadcast won't be made, will it?" Yael asked low. In the shadows of the
room, her eyes glimmered enormous. She has children uptime, Everard
remembered. They would vanish with their world.
 
"No," he said.
 
"And yet our reality remains!" burst from Chaim. "You came here, out of it,
starting uptime of 1980. So we must have caught the criminals."
 
Everard's sigh seemed to leave a track of pain through his breast. "You know
better than that," he said tonelessly. "The quantum nature of the continuum -
If Tyre explodes, why, here we'll be, but our ancestors, your kids,
everything we knew, they won't. It'll be a whole different history. Whether
whatever is left of the Patrol can restore it - somehow head off the disaster
- that's problematical. I'd call it unlikely."
 
"But what would the criminals have gained, then?" The question was raw,
almost a screech.
 
Everard shrugged. "A certain wild satisfaction, I guess. The temptation to
play God slinks around in the best of us, doesn't it? And the temptation to
play Satan isn't unrelated. Besides, they'd be careful to lurk downtime of
the destruction; they'd stay existent. They'd have a good chance of making
themselves overlords of a future where nothing but bits and pieces of the
Patrol were left to oppose them. Or at a minimum, they'd have a lot of fun
trying."
 
Sometimes I myself have chafed at the restrictions on me. "Ah, Love! could
thou and I with Fate conspire To grasp this sorry Scheme of Things entire-"
 
"Besides," he added, "conceivably the Danellians will countermand the
decision and order us to release the secret. I could return home to find that
feature of my world wasn't the same any longer. A trivial variation as far as
the twentieth century is concerned, affecting nothing noticeable."
 
"But later centuries?" the woman gasped.
 
"Yeah. We've only the gang's word that it'll confine its attentions to
planets in the far future and beyond the Solar System. I'll bet whatever you
like that that word is worthless. Given the capabilities of the transmuter,
why shouldn't they play fast and loose with Earth? It'll always be the human
globe, and I don't see how the Patrol can stop them."
 
"Who are they?" Chaim whispered. "Have you any idea?"
 
Everard drank whisky and smoke, as if warmth could seep through his tongue
into his spirit. "Too early to say, on my personal world line ... or yours,
hm? Plain to see, they're from far uptime, though short of the Era of Oneness
that precedes the Danellians. In the course of many millennia, information
about the transmuter was bound to leak out - enough to give somebody a clear
notion of the thing and of what he might do with it. Certainly he and his
buddies are rootless desperados; they don't give a damn that their action
threatens to eliminate the society that begot them, and everybody living in
it whom they ever knew. But I don't think they are, say, Neldorians. This
operation is too sophisticated. The enemy's got to have spent a lot of
lifespan, a lot of effort, getting to know the Phoenician milieu well and
establishing that it is in fact a nexus.
 
"The organizing brain must be of genius level. But with a touch of
childishness - did you notice that Friday the thirteenth date? Likewise,
performing the sabotage practically next door to you. The M.O. - and my being
recognized as a Patrolman-those do suggest - Merau Varagan?"
 
"Who?"
 
Everard didn't reply. He went on mumbling, mostly to himself: "Could be,
could be. Not that that's much help. The gang did its homework, downtime of
today, surely - yes, they'd want an informational baseline covering quite a
few years. And this post is undermanned. The whole goddamn Patrol is."
Regardless of agents' longevity. Sooner or later, something or other will get
each and every one of us. And we don't go back to cancel the deaths of our
comrades, nor to see them again while they lived, because that could start an
eddy in time, which might grow into a maelstrom; or if not, it would at least
rack us too cruelly. "We can detect time vehicles arriving and departing, if
we know where and when to aim our instruments. That may be how the gang
discovered this is Patrol HQ, if they didn't learn it routinely in the guise
of honest visitors. Or they could have entered this era elsewhere and come by
ordinary transportation, looking like any of countless legitimate
contemporary people, the same way I tried to.
 
"We can't ransack every bit of local space-time. We haven't the manpower, nor
dare we risk the disruption that so much activity of ours could cause. No,
Chaim, Yael, we've got to find ourselves some clues, to narrow down our
search. But how? Where do I start?"
 
His disguise being penetrated, Everard accepted the Zorachs' offer of a
guestroom. He'd be more comfortable here than in an inn, and handier to
whatever gadgets he might need. However, he'd also be cut off from the real
life of the city.
 
"I'll arrange an interview with the king for you," his host promised. "No
difficulty; he's a brilliant man, bound to be interested in an exotic like
you." He chuckled. "Therefore it will be very natural for Zakarbaal the
Sidonian, who needs to cultivate the friendship of the Tyrians, to inform him
of a chance meeting with you."
 
"That's fine," Everard replied, "and I'll enjoy paying the call. Maybe he can
even be some help to us. Meanwhile, uh, we've got several hours of daylight
left. I think I'll stroll around town, start getting the feel of it, pick up
a scent if I'm lucky."
 
Zorach scowled. "You might be what's picked up. The killer is skulking yet,
I'm sure."
 
Everard shrugged. "A chance I take; and could be him that comes to grief.
Lend me a gun, please. Sonic."
 
He set the weapon to stun, not slay. A live prisoner was at the top of his
birthday list. Since the enemy would be aware of that, he didn't really
expect another attempt on him - today, at any rate.
 
"Take a blaster, too," Zorach urged. "I wouldn't put it past them to come
after you from the air. Bring a hopper to an instant where you are, hover on
antigravity, and potshoot, hm? They don't have our motivation to stay
inconspicuous."
 
Everard holstered the energy gun opposite the other. Any Phoenician who
noticed would take them for charms or something of the kind, and besides,
he'd let a cloak fall over them. "I scarcely think I'd be worth that much
effort and risk," he said.
 
"You were worth trying for earlier, weren't you? How did that guy know you
for an agent, anyway?"
 
"He may have had a description. Merau Varagan would realize that just a few
Unattached operatives, me among them, were likely choices for this
assignment. Which inclines me more and more to think he is behind the plot.
If I'm right, we've got a mean and slippery opponent."
 
"Stay in public view," Yael Zorach pleaded. "Be sure to get back before dark.
Violent crime is rare here, but there are no lights, the streets grow nearly
deserted, you'd become easy prey."
 
Everard imagined himself hunting his hunter through the night, but decided
not to attempt provoking such a situation unless he became desperate. "Okay,
I'll return for dinner. I'm interested in what Tyrian food is like -ashore,
not ship rations."
 
She mustered a smile. "Not awfully good, I'm afraid. The natives aren't
sensualists. However, I've taught our cook several uptime recipes. Do you
like gefilte fish for an appetizer?"
 
 
 
Shadows had lengthened and air cooled somewhat when Everard stepped forth.
Traffic bustled along the street crossing Chandlers, though no more than
earlier. Situated on the water, Tyre and Usu were generally free of the
extreme midday heat that dictated a siesta in many countries, and no true
Phoenician would waste hours asleep in which he might turn a profit.
 
"Master!" warbled a joyful voice.
 
Why, it's my little wharf rat. "Hail, uh, Pum-mairam," Everard said. The boy
bounced up from his squat. "What are you waiting for?"
 
The slight brown form bowed low, albeit eyes and lips held as much merriment
as reverence. "What but the fervently prayed-for hope that I might again be
of service to his luminosity?"
 
Everard stopped and scratched his head. The kid had been almighty quick, had
possibly saved his bacon, but - "Well, I'm sorry, but I've no further need of
help."
 
"Oh, sir, you jest. See how I laugh, delighted by your wit! A guide, an
introducer, a warder off of rogues and . . . certain worse persons - surely a
lord of your magnanimity will not deny a poor sprig the glory of his
presence, the benefit of his wisdom, the never-to-be-forgotten memory in
after years of having trotted at his august heels."
 
While the words were sycophantic, that was conventional in this society, and
the tone was anything but. Pummairam was having fun, Everard saw. Doubtless
he was curious, too, as well as eager to earn more. He fairly quivered where
he stood looking straight up at the huge man.
 
Everard made his decision. "You win, you rogue," he said, and grinned when
Pummairam whooped and danced. It wasn't a bad idea to have such an attendant,
anyway. Wasn't his purpose to get to know the city, rather than merely its
sights? "Now tell me what it is you are thinking you can do for me."
 
The boy poised, cocked his head, laid finger to chin. "That depends upon what
my master's desire may be. If business, what kind and with whom? If pleasure,
likewise. My lord has but to speak."
 
"Hm-m. ..." Well, why not level with him, to the extent that is allowable? If
he proves unsatisfactory, I can always fire him, though I expect he'd cling
like a tick. "Then hear me, Pum. I do have weighty matters to handle in Tyre.
Yes, they may well concern the suffetes and the king's self. You saw how a
magician tried to stop me. Aye, you aided me against him. That may happen
anew, and I not so lucky next time. It's barred I am from saying more about
that. Yet I think you'll understand my need to learn a great deal, to meet
people of many kinds. What would you suggest? A tavern, maybe, and I buying
drinks for the house?"
 
Pum's quicksilver mood froze to seriousness. He frowned and stared into space
for a few heartbeats, before he snapped his fingers and cackled. "Ah, indeed!
Well, excellent master, I can recommend no better beginning than a visit to
the High Temple of Asherat."
 
"Hey?" Startled, Everard flipped through the information planted in his
brain. Asherat, whom the Bible would call Astarte, was the consort of
Melqart, the patron god of Tyre - Baal-Melek-Qart-Sor. . . . She was a mighty
figure in her own right, goddess of fruitfulness in man, beast, and land, a
female warrior who had once dared hell itself to recall her lover from the
dead, a sea queen of whom Tanith might be simply an avatar . . . yes, she was
Ishtar in Babylon, and she would enter the Grecian world as Aphrodite. . . .
 
"Why, the vast learning of my lord surely includes the fact that it would be
foolish for a visitor, most especially a visitor as important as he, not to
pay homage to her, that she may smile upon his enterprise. Truly, if the
priests heard of such an omission, they would set themselves against you.
That has, indeed, caused difficulties with some of the emissaries from
Jerusalem. Also, is it not a good deed to release a lady from bondage and
yearning?" Pum leered, winked, and nudged Everard. "Besides being a
pleasurable romp."
 
The Patrolman remembered. For a moment, he was taken aback. Like most other
Semites of this era, the Phoenicians required that every freeborn woman
sacrifice her virginity in the fane of the goddess, as a sacred prostitute.
Not until a man had paid for her favor might she marry. The custom was not
lewd in origin, it traced back to Stone Age fertility rites and fears. To be
sure, it also attracted profitable pilgrims and foreign visitors.
 
"I trust my lord's folk do not forbid such an act?" the boy inquired
anxiously.
 
"Well. . . . They do not."
 
"Good!" Pum took Everard by the elbow and steered him off. "If my lord will
allow his servant to accompany him, quite likely I shall recognize someone
whom he would find it useful thus to get acquainted with. In all abasement,
let me say that I do get around and I do keep eyes and ears open. They are
utterly at the service of my master."
 
Everard grinned, on one side of his mouth, and strode along. Why shouldn't
he? To be honest with himself, after his sea voyage he felt damnably horny;
and it was true, patronizing the holy whorehouse was, in this milieu, not an
exploitation but a kindness; and he might even get some lead in his mission.
. . .
 
First I'd better try to find out how reliable my guide is. "Tell me something
about yourself, Pum. We may be together for, well, several days if not more."
 
They came out on the avenue and threaded their way through jostling,
shouting, odorous throngs. "There is little to tell, great lord. The annals
of the poor are short and simple." That coincidence startled Everard too.
Then, as Pum talked, he realized that the phrase was false in this case.
 
Father unknown, presumably one of the sailors and laborers who frequented a
certain low-life hostel while Tyre was under construction and had the
wherewithal to enjoy its serving wench, Pum was a pup in a litter, raised
catch-as-catch-can, a scavenger from the time he could walk and, Everard
suspected, a thief, and whatever else might get him the local equivalent of a
buck. Nonetheless, early on he had become an acolyte at a dockside temple of
the comparatively unimportant god Baal Hammon. (Everard harked back to
tumbledown churches in the slums of twentieth-century America.) Its priest
had been a learned man once, now gentle and drunken; Pum had garnered
considerable vocabulary and other knowledge from him, like a squirrel
garnering acorns in a wood, until he died. His more respectable successor
kicked the raffish postulant out. Despite that, Pum went on to make a wide
circle of acquaintances, which reached into the palace itself. Royal servants
came down to the waterfront in search of cheap fun. . . . Still too young to
assume any kind of leadership, he was wangling a living however he could. His
survival to date was no mean accomplishment.
 
Yes, Everard thought, / may have lucked out, just a little.
 
 
 
The temples of Melqart and Asherat confronted each other across a busy square
near the middle of town. The former was the larger, but the latter was amply
impressive. A porch of many columns, with elaborate capitals and gaudy paint,
gave on a flagged courtyard wherein stood a great brass basin of water for
ritual cleansing. The house rose along the farther side of the enclosure, its
squareness relieved by stone facing, marble, granite, jasper. Two pillars
flanked the doorway, overtopping the roof and shining. (In Solomon's Temple,
which copied Tyrian design, these would be named Jachin and Boaz.) Within,
Everard knew, was a main chamber for worshippers, and beyond it the sanctuary.
 
Some of the forum crowd had spilled into the court and stood about in little
groups. The men among them, he guessed, simply wanted a quiet place to
discuss business or whatever. Women outnumbered them-housewives for the most
part, often balancing loads on their scarved heads, taking a break from
marketing to make a brief devotion and indulge in a bit of gossip. While the
attendants of the goddess were male, here females were always welcome.
 
Stares followed Everard as Pum urged him toward the temple. He began to feel
self-conscious, even abashed. A priest sat at a table, in the shade behind
the open door. Except for a rainbow-colored robe and a phallic silver
pendant, he looked no different from a layman, his hair and beard
well-trimmed, his features aquiline and lively.
 
Pum halted before him and said importantly, "Greeting, holy one. My master
and I wish to honor Our Lady of Nuptials."
 
The priest signed a blessing. "Praises be. A foreigner confers double
fortune." Interest gleamed in his eyes. "Whence come you, worthy stranger?"
 
"From north across the waters," Everard replied.
 
"Yes, yes, that's clear, but it's a vast and unknown territory. Might you be
from a land of the Sea Peoples themselves?" The priest waved at a stool like
that which he occupied. "Pray be seated, noble sir, take your ease for a
while, let me pour you a cup of wine."
 
Pum jittered about for several minutes in an agony of frustration, before he
hunkered down under a column and sulked. Everard and the priest conversed for
almost an hour. Others drifted up to listen and join in.
 
It could easily have lasted all day. Everard was finding out a lot. Probably
none of it was germane to his mission, but you never knew, and anyway, he
enjoyed the gab session. What brought him back to earth was mention of the
sun. It had dropped below the porch roof. He remembered Yael Zorach's
warning, and cleared his throat.
 
"Och, how I regret it, my friends, but time passes and I must soon begone. If
we are first to pay our respects -"
 
Pum brightened. The priest laughed. "Aye," he said, "after so long a faring,
the fire of Asherat must burn hotly. Well, now, the free-will donation is
half a shekel of silver or its value in goods. Of course, men of wealth and
rank are wont to give more."
 
Everard paid over a generous chunk of metal. The priest repeated his blessing
and gave him and Pum each a small ivory disc, rather explicitly engraved. "Go
in, my sons, seek whom you will do good, cast these in their laps. Ah . . .
you understand, do you not, great Eborix, that you are to take your chosen
one off the sacred premises? Tomorrow she will return the token and receive
the benison. If you have no place of your own nigh to here, then my kinsman
Hanno rents clean rooms at a modest rate, in his inn just down the Street of
the Date Sellers. ..."
 
Pum fairly zoomed inside. Everard followed with what he hoped was more
dignity. His talkmates called raunchy good wishes. That was part of the
ceremony, the magic.
 
The chamber was large, its gloom not much relieved by oil lamps. They picked
out intricate murals, gold leaf, inset semiprecious stones. At the far end
shimmered a gilt image of the goddess, arms held out in a compassion which
somehow came through the rather primitive sculpturing. Everard sensed
fragrances, myrrh and sandal-wood, and an irregular undertone of rustles and
whispers.
 
As his pupils widened, he discerned the women. Perhaps a hundred altogether,
they sat on stools, crowded along the walls to right and left. Their garb
ranged from fine linen to ragged wool. Some slumped, some stared blankly,
some made gestures of invitation as bold as the rules permitted, most looked
timidly and wistfully at the men who strolled by them. Those visitors were
few, at this hour of an ordinary day. Everard thought he identified three or
four mariners on shore leave, a fat merchant, a couple of young bucks. Their
deportment was reasonably polite; it was a church here.
 
His pulses pounded. Damnation, he thought, irritated, why am I making such a
production in my head? I've been with enough women before.
 
Sadness touched him. Only two virgins, though.
 
He walked along, watching, wondering, avoiding glances. Pum sought him and
tugged his sleeve. "Radiant master," the youth hissed, "your servant may have
found that which you require."
 
"Huh?" Everard let his attendant drag him out to the center of the room,
where they could murmur unheard.
 
"My lord understands that this child of poverty could never hitherto enter
these precincts," spilled from Pum. "Yet, as I said earlier, I do have
acquaintanceship reaching into the royal palace itself. I know of a lady who
has come each time her duties and the moon allow, to wait and wait, these
past three years. She is Sarai, daughter of shepherd folk in the hills.
Through an uncle in the guard, she got a post in the king's household, at
first only as a scullery maid, but now working closely with the chief
steward. And she is here today. Since my master wishes to make contacts of
that sort -"
 
Bemused, Everard followed his guide. When they halted, he gulped. The woman
who, low-voiced, responded to Pum's greeting, was squat, big-nosed - he
decided to think of her as homely - and verging on spinsterhood. But the gaze
she lifted to the Patrolman was bright and unafraid. "Would you like to
release me?" she asked quietly. "I would pray for you for the rest of my
life."
 
Before he could change his mind, he pitched his token onto her skirt.
 
 
 
Pum had found himself a beauty, arrived this same day and engaged to the
scion of a prominent family. She was dismayed when such a ragamuffin picked
her. Well, that was her problem. And perhaps his too, though Everard doubted
it.
 
The rooms in Hanno's inn were tiny, equipped with straw mattresses and little
else. Slit windows, giving on the inner court, admitted a trickle of evening
light, also smoke, street and kitchen smells, chatter, plaintiveness of a
bone flute. Everard drew the reed curtain that served as a door and turned to
his companion.
 
She knelt before him as if huddling into her garments. "I do not know your
name or your country, sir," she said, low and not quite steadily. "Do you
care to tell your handmaiden?"
 
"Why, sure." He gave her his alias. "And you are Sarai from Rasil Ayin?"
 
"Did the beggar boy send my lord to me?" She bowed her head. "No, forgive me,
I meant no insolence, I was thoughtless."
 
He ventured to push back her scarf and stroke her hair. Though coarse, it was
abundant, her best physical feature. "No offense taken. See here, shall we
get to know each other a bit? What would you say to a cup or two of wine
before - Well, what would you say?"
 
She gasped, astounded. He went out, found the landlord, made the provision.
 
Presently, as they sat side by side on the floor with his arm around her
shoulders, she was talking freely. Phoenicians had scant concept of personal
privacy. Also, while their women got more respect and independence than those
of most societies, still, a little consideration on a man's part went a long
ways.
 
"- no, no betrothal yet for me, Eborix. I came to the city because my father
is poor, with many other children to provide for, and it did not seem anybody
in our tribe would ever ask my hand for his son. You wouldn't possibly know
of someone?" He himself, who would take her maidenhead, was debarred. In
fact, her question bent the law that forbade prearrangement, as for example
with a friend. "I have won standing in the palace, in truth if not in name. I
wield some small power among servants, purveyors, entertainers. I have
scraped together a dowry for myself, not large, but ... but it may be the
goddess will smile on me at last, after I have made this oblation -"
 
"I'm sorry," he answered in compassion. "I'm a stranger here."
 
He understood, or supposed he did. She wanted desperately to get married:
less to have a husband and put an end to the barely veiled scorn and
suspicion in which the unwedded were held, than to have children. Among these
people, few fates were more terrible than to die childless, to go doubly into
the grave. . . . Her defenses broke apart and she wept against his breast.
 
The light was failing. Everard decided to forget Yael's fears (and - a
chuckle - Pum's exasperation) and take his time, treat Sarai like a human
being simply because that was what she in fact was, wait for darkness and
then use his imagination. Afterward he'd see her back to her quarters.
 
 
 
The Zorachs were mainly upset because of the anxiety their guest caused them,
not returning until well past sunset. He didn't tell them what he had been
doing, nor did they press him about it. After all, they were agents in place,
able persons who coped with a difficult job often full of surprises, but they
were not detectives.
 
Everard did feel obliged to apologize for spoiling their supper. That was to
have been an unusual treat. Normally the main meal of the day occurred about
midafternoon, and folk had little more than a snack in the evening. A reason
for this was the dimness of lamplight, which made it troublesome to prepare
anything elaborate.
 
Nonetheless, the technical accomplishments of the Phoenicians deserved
admiration. Over breakfast, which was also a sparse meal, lentils cooked with
leeks and accompanied by hardtack, Chaim mentioned the waterworks.
Rain-catching cisterns were helpful but insufficient. Hiram didn't want Tyre
dependent on boats from Usu, nor linked to the mainland by an extended
aqueduct that could serve an enemy as a bridge. Like the Sidonians before
him, he had a project in train that would draw fresh water from springs
beneath the sea.
 
And then, of course, there was the skill, the accumulated knowledge and
ingenuity, behind dyeworks and glassworks, not to mention ships less frail
than they looked, since in the future they would ply as far as Britain. . . .
 
"The Purple Empire, somebody in our century called Phoenicia," Everard mused.
"Almost makes me wonder if Merau Varagan has a thing for that color. Didn't
W. H. Hudson call Uruguay the Purple Land?" His laugh clanked. "No, I'm being
foolish. The murex dyes generally have more red than blue in them. Besides,
Varagan was doing his dirty work a lot farther north than Uruguay when we
collided 'earlier.' And so far I've no proof he's involved in this case; only
a hunch."
 
"What happened?" asked Yael. Her glance sought him across the table, through
sunlight that slanted in a doorway open to the garden court.
 
"No matter now."
 
"Are you certain?" Chaim persisted. "Conceivably your experience will call
something to our minds that will be a clue. Anyhow, we do get starved for
outside news in a post like this."
 
"Especially adventures as wonderful as yours," Yael added.
 
Everard smiled wryly. "To quote still another writer, adventure is somebody
else having a hell of a tough time a thousand miles away," he said. "And when
the stakes are high, like here, that really makes a situation feel bad." He
paused. "Well, no reason not to spin you the yarn, though in very sketchy
form, because the background's complicated. Uh, if a servant isn't going to
come in soon, I'd like to light my pipe. And is any of that lovely
clandestine coffee left in the pot?"
 
- He settled himself, rolled smoke across his tongue, let the rising warmth
of the day bake his bones after the night's nippiness. "My mission was to
South America, the Colombia region, late in the year 1826. Under Simon
Bolivar's leadership, the patriots had cast off Spanish rule, but they still
had plenty troubles of their own. That included worries about the Liberator
himself. He'd put through a constitution for Bolivia that gave him
extraordinary powers as lifetime president; was he going to turn into a
Napoleon and bring all the new republics under his heel? The military
commander in Venezuela, which was then a part of Colombia, or New Granada as
it called itself-he revolted. Not that this Jose Paez was such an altruist; a
harsh bastard, in fact.
 
"Oh, never mind details. I don't remember them well myself any more.
Essentially, Bolivar, who was a Venezuelan by birth, made a march from Lima
to Bogota. Only took him a couple of months, which was fast in those days
over that terrain. Arriving, he assumed martial-law presidential powers, and
moved on into Venezuela against Paez. Bloodshed was becoming heavy there.
 
"Meanwhile Patrol agents, monitoring the history, turned up indications that
all was not kosher. (Um-m, pardon me.) Bolivar wasn't behaving quite like the
selfless humanitarian that his biographers, by and large, described. He'd
acquired a friend from . . . somewhere . . . whom he trusted. This man's
advice had, on occasion, been brilliant. Yet it seemed as if he might be
turning into Bolivar's evil genius. And the biographies never mentioned him.
. . .
 
"I was among the Unattached operatives dispatched to investigate. This was
because I, before ever hearing of the Patrol, had kicked around some in those
boonies. That gave me a slight special sense for what to do. I could never
pass myself off as a Latin American, but I could be a Yankee soldier of
fortune, in part starry-eyed over the liberation, in part hoping somehow to
cash in on it - and, mainly, though macho enough, free of the kind of
arrogance that would have put those proud people off.
 
"It's a long and generally tedious story. Believe me, my friends, 99 percent
of an operation in the field amounts to patient collection of dull and
usually irrelevant facts, in between interminable periods of
hurry-up-and-wait. Let's say that, aided by a good deal of luck, I managed to
infiltrate, make my connections, pass out my bribes, gather my informers and
my evidence. At last there was no reasonable doubt. This obscurely
originating Blasco Lopez had to be from the future.
 
"I called in our troops and we raided the house where he was staying in
Bogota. Most of those we collared were harmless local people, hired as
servants, though what they had to tell proved useful. Lopez's mistress,
accompanying him, turned out to be his associate. She told us a lot more, in
exchange for comfortable accommodations when she'd go to the exile planet.
But the ringleader himself had broken free and escaped.
 
"One man on horseback, headed for the Cordillera Oriental that rises beyond
the town - one man like ten thousand genuine Creoles - we couldn't go after
him on time hoppers. The search could too damn easily get too damn
noticeable. Who knew what effect that might have? The conspirators had
already made the timestream unstable....
 
"I grabbed a horse, a couple of remounts, some jerky and vitamin pills for
myself, and set off in pursuit."
 
 
 
Wind boomed hollowly down the mountainside. Grass and low, scattered shrubs
trembled beneath its chill. Up ahead, they gave way to naked rock. Right,
left, behind, peaks reared into a blue bleakness. A condor wheeled huge, on
watch for any death. Snowfields on the heights above glowed beneath a
declining sun.
 
A musket cracked. At its distance, the noise it made was tiny, though echoes
flew. Everard heard the bullet buzz. Close! He hunched down in the saddle and
spurred his steed onward.
 
Varagan can't really expect to drop me at this range, passed through him.
What, then? Does he hope I'll slow down? If so, if he gains a little on me,
what use is that to him? What goal has he got?
 
His enemy still led him by half a mile, but Everard could see how yonder
animal lurched along, exhausted. To get on Varagan's trail had taken some
while, going from this peon to that sheepherder and asking if a man of the
given description had ridden by. However, Varagan had only the single horse,
which he must spare if it was not to collapse under him. After Everard found
the traces, a wilderness-trained eye had readily been able to follow them,
and the pace of the hunt picked up.
 
It was also known that Varagan had fled bearing no more than a muzzle-loader.
He'd been spending powder and balls pretty freely ever since the Patrolman
hove in view. Since he was a fast recharger and an excellent shot, it did
have its delaying effect. But what refuge was in these wastes? Varagan
appeared to be making for a particular crag. It was conspicuous, not only
high but its shape suggestive of a castle tower. It was no fortress, though.
If Varagan took shelter behind it, Everard could use the blaster he carried
to bring the rock molten down upon his head.
 
Maybe Varagan wasn't aware the agent had such a weapon. Impossible. Varagan
was a monster, yes, but not a fool.
 
Everard pulled down his hatbrim and drew his poncho tight against the wind.
He didn't reach for the blaster, no point in that yet, but as if by instinct,
his left hand dropped to the flintlock pistol and saber at his hip. They were
mainly part of his costume, intended to make him an authority figure to the
inhabitants, but there was an odd comfort in their massiveness.
 
Having reined in to shoot, Varagan continued straight on uphill, this time
without lingering to reload. Everard brought his own horse from trot to
canter and closed the gap further. He kept alert - not tensed, but alert
against contingencies, ready to swing aside or even jump down behind the
beast. Nothing happened, just that lonesome trek on through the cold. Could
Varagan have fired his last ammunition? Have a care, Manse, old son. The
sparse alpine grass ended, save for tufts between boulders, and rock rang
beneath hoofs.
 
Varagan halted near the crag and sat waiting. The musket was sheathed and his
hands rested empty on the saddlebow. His horse quivered and swayed, neck
a-droop, utterly blown, lather swept freezingly off its hide and out of its
mane.
 
Everard took forth his energy gun and clattered nigh. Behind him, a remount
whickered. Still Varagan waited.
 
Everard stopped three yards off. "Merau Varagan, you are under arrest by the
Time Patrol," he called in Temporal.
 
The other smiled. "You have the advantage of me," he replied in a soft tone
that, somehow, carried. "May I request the honor of learning your name and
provenance?"
 
"Uh . . . Manson Everard, Unattached, born in the United States of America
about a hundred years uptime. No matter. You're coming back with me. Hold on
while I call a hopper. I warn you, at the least suspicion you're about to try
something, I'll shoot. You're too dangerous for me to be squeamish."
 
Varagan made a gentle gesture. "Really? How much do you know about me, Agent
Everard, or think you know, to justify this violent an attitude?"
 
"Well, when a man takes potshots at me, I reckon he's not a very nice person."
 
"Might I perhaps have believed you were a bandit, of the sort who haunt these
uplands? What crime am I alleged to have committed?"
 
Everard's free hand paused on its way to get out the little communicator in
his pocket. For a moment, eerily fascinated, he stared through the wind at
his prisoner.
 
Merau Varagan seemed taller than he actually was, as straight as he held his
athletic frame. Black hair tossed around a skin whose whiteness the sun and
the weather had not tinged at all. There was no sign of beard. The face might
have been a young Caesar's, were it not too finely chiseled. The eyes were
large and green, the smiling lips cherry-red. His clothes, down to the boots,
were silver-trimmed black, like the cape that flapped about his shoulders.
Seen against the turreted crag, he made Everard remember Dracula.
 
Yet his voice remained mild: "Evidently your colleagues have extracted
information from mine. I daresay you have been in touch with them as you
fared. Thus you know our names and somewhat of our origin - "
 
Thirty-first millennium. Outlaws after the failure of the Exaltationists to
cast off the weight of a civilization grown older than the Old Stone Age was
to me. During their moment of power, they possessed themselves of time
machines. Their genetic heritage -
 
Nietzsche might have understood them. I never will.
 
"- But what do you truly know of our purpose here?"
 
"You were going to change events," Everard retorted. "We barely forestalled
you. At that, our corps has a lot of tricky restoration work ahead. Why did
you do it? How could you be so ... so selfish?"
 
"I think 'egoistic' might be a better word," Varagan gibed. "The ascendancy
of the ego, the unconfined will - But think. Would it have been altogether
bad if Simon Bolivar had founded a true empire in Hispanic America, rather
than a gaggle of quarrelsome successor states? It would have been
enlightened, progressive. Imagine how much suffering and death would have
been averted."
 
"Come off that!" Everard felt anger rise and rise within himself. "You must
know better. It's impossible. Bolivar hasn't the cadre, the communications,
the support. If he's a hero to many, he's at least got many others furious
with him: like the Peruvians, after he detached Bolivia. He'll cry on his
deathbed that he 'plowed the sea' in all his efforts to build a stable
society.
 
"If you meant it about unifying even part of the continent, you'd have tried
earlier and elsewhere."
 
"Indeed?"
 
"Yes. The only chance. I've studied the situation. In 1821 San Martin was
negotiating with the Spanish in Peru, and playing with the idea of setting up
a monarchy under somebody like Don Carlos, King Ferdinand's brother. It could
have included the territories of Bolivia and Ecuador, maybe later Chile and
Argentina, because it would have had the advantages Bolivar's inner sphere
lacks. But why am I telling you this, you bastard, except to prove I know
you're lying? You must have done your own homework."
 
"What then do you suppose my real objective was?"
 
"Obvious. To make Bolivar overreach himself. He's an idealist, a dreamer, as
well as a warrior. If he pushes too hard, everything hereabouts will break up
in a chaos that could well spread to the rest of South America. And there
would be your chance for seizing power!"
 
Varagan shrugged, as a were-cat might have shrugged. "Concede me this much,"
he said, "that such an empire would have had a certain dark magnificence."
 
The hopper flashed into being and hovered twenty feet aloft. Its rider
grinned and aimed the firearm he carried. From the saddle of his horse, Merau
Varagan waved at his time-traveling self.
 
Everard never quite knew what happened next. Somehow he made it out of the
stirrups and onto the ground. His horse screamed as an energy bolt struck.
Smoke and a stench of seared flesh spurted forth. Even while the slain animal
crumpled, Everard shot back from behind it.
 
The enemy hopper must veer. Everard skipped clear of the falling mass and
maintained fire, upward and sideways. Varagan leaped from his own horse,
behind the rock. Lightnings blazed and crackled. Everard's free hand yanked
forth his communicator and thumbed the Mayday spot.
 
The vehicle dropped, rearward of the crag. Displaced air made a popping
noise. Wind blew away the stinging ozone.
 
A Patrol machine appeared. It was too late. Merau Varagan had already borne
his earlier self away to an unknowable point of space-time.
 
 
 
Everard nodded heavily. "Yeah," he finished, "that was his scheme, and it
worked, God damn it. Reach an obvious landmark and note the time on his
watch. That meant he'd know, later along his world line, where-when to go, in
mounting his rescue operation."
 
The Zorachs were appalled. "But, but a casual loop of that sort," Chaim
stammered, "didn't he have any idea of the dangers?"
 
"Doubtless he did, including the possibility that he would make himself never
have existed," Everard replied. "But then, he'd been quite prepared to wipe
out an entire future, in favor of a history where he could have ridden high.
He's totally fearless, the ultimate desperado. That was built into the genes
of the Exaltationist princes."
 
He sighed. "They lack loyalty, also. Varagan, and whatever associates he had
left, made no attempt to save those we'd captured. They just vanished. We've
been wary of their reappearance ever 'since then,' and this new caper does
bear similarities to that one. But of course - time loop hazard again - I
can't go read whatever report I'll have filed at the conclusion of the
present affair. If it has a conclusion, and if I don't."
 
Yael patted his hand. "I'm sure you'll prevail, Manse," she said. "What
happened next in South America?"
 
"Oh, once the bad counsel, which he hadn't recognized was bad - once that
stopped, Bolivar went back to his natural ways," Everard told them. "He made
a peaceful settlement with Paez and issued a general amnesty. More troubles
broke out later, but he handled them capably and humanely, too, while
fostering both the interests and the culture of his people. When he died,
most of the great wealth he'd inherited was gone, because he'd never taken a
centavo of public money for himself. A good ruler, one of the few that
humankind will ever know.
 
"So's Hiram, I gather - and now his rule is threatened likewise, by whatever
devil is loose in the world."
 
 
 
When Everard emerged, sure enough, there was Pum waiting. The boy skipped to
meet him.
 
"Where would my glorious master go today?" he caroled. "Let his servant
conduct him whithersoever he wills. Perhaps to visit Conor the amber factor?"
 
"Huh?" In slight shock, the Patrolman goggled at the native. "What makes you
think I've aught to do with . . . any such person?"
 
Pum returned a look whose deference failed to mask its shrewdness. "Did not
my lord declare this was his intention, while aboard Mago's ship?"
 
"How do you know that?" Everard barked.
 
"Why, I sought out men of the crew, engaged them in talk, lured forth their
memories. Not that your humble servant would pry into that which he should
not hear. If I have transgressed, I abase myself and beg forgiveness. My aim
was merely to learn more of my master's plans in order that I might think how
best to assist them." Pum beamed in undiminished cockiness.
 
"Oh. I see." Everard tugged his mustache and peered around. Nobody else was
in earshot. "Well, then, know that that was a pretense. My true business is
different." As you must have guessed already, from the fact of my going
straight to Zakarbaal and lodging with him, he added silently. This was far
from the first time that experience reminded him that people in any given era
could be intrinsically as sharp as anybody futureward of them.
 
"Ah, indeed! Business of the greatest moment, assuredly. The lips of my
master's servant are sealed."
 
"Understand that my aims are in no way hostile. Sidon is friendly to Tyre.
Let's say I'm involved in an effort to organize a large joint venture."
 
"To increase trade with my master's people? Ah, but then you do want to visit
your countryman Conor, no?"
 
"I do not!" Everard realized he had shouted. He curbed his temper. "Conor is
not my countryman, not in the way that Mago is yours. My folk have no single
country. Aye, most likely Conor and I would not be understanding each other's
languages."
 
That was more than likely. Everard had too much intellectual baggage to carry
as was, information about Phoenicia, to pile on a heap about the Celts. The
electronic educator had simply taught him enough to pass for one among
outsiders who didn't know them intimately - he hoped.
 
"What I've in mind," he said, "is just to stroll about the city today, whilst
Zakarbaal seeks to get me an audience with the king." He smiled. "Sure, and
for this I could well put myself in your hands, lad."
 
Pum's laughter pealed. He clapped his palms together. "Ah, my lord is wise!
Come evening, let him deem whether or not he was led to pleasure and, yes,
knowledge such as he seeks, and perhaps he ... will in his magnanimity see
fit to bestow largesse on his guide."
 
Everard grinned. "Give me the grand tour, then."
 
Pum assumed shyness. "May we first seek the Street of the Tailors? Yesterday
I took it upon myself to order new garb that should be ready now. The cost
will bear hard on a poor youth, despite the munificence his master has
already shown, for I must pay for speed as well as fine material. Yet it is
not fitting that a great lord's attendant should go in rags like these."
 
Everard groaned, though he didn't really mind. "I catch your drift. Och, how
I do! 'Tis unsuited to my dignity that you buy your own garments. Well, let's
go, and 'tis I will be standing you your coat of many colors."
 
 
 
Hiram did not quite resemble his average subject. He was taller,
lighter-complexioned, hair and beard reddish, eyes gray, nose straight. His
appearance recalled the Sea Peoples - that buccaneer horde of displaced
Cretans and European barbarians, some of them from the far North, who raided
Egypt a couple of centuries before, and eventually became the principal
ancestors of the Philistines. A lesser number, ending up in Lebanon and
Syria, interbred with certain Bedouin types who were themselves getting
interested in nautical things. From that cross arose the Phoenicians. The
invader blood still showed in their aristocrats.
 
Solomon's palace, of which the Bible was to boast, would when finished be a
cut-rate imitation of the house in which Hiram already dwelt. The king
himself, though, usually went simply clad, in a white linen kaftan with
purple trim, slippers of fine leather, a gold headband and a massive ruby
ring to signify royalty. His manner, likewise, was direct and unaffected.
Middle-aged, he looked younger, and his vigor remained unabated.
 
He and Everard sat in a room broad, gracious, and airy, that opened on a
cloister garden and fish pond. The carpet was of straw, but dyed in fine
patterns. Frescos on the plaster walls had been done by an artist imported
from Babylonia, depicting arbors, flowers, and winged chimeras. A low table
between the men was of ebony inlaid with mother-of-pearl. It held unwatered
wine in glass cups, and dishes of fruit, bread, cheese, sweets. A pretty girl
in a diaphanous gown knelt nearby and strummed a lyre. Two manservants
awaited orders in the background.
 
"You are being right mysterious, Eborix," murmured Hiram.
 
"Sure, and 'tis not my wish to withhold aught from your highness," Everard
replied carefully. A word of command could bring in guardsmen to kill him.
No, that was unlikely; a guest was sacred. But if he offended the king, his
whole mission was compromised. "Aye, vague I am about certain things, but
only because my knowledge of them is slight. Nor would I risk laying baseless
charges against anyone, should my information prove in error."
 
Hiram bridged his fingers and frowned. "Still, you claim to bear word of
danger-word which contradicts what you have said elsewhere. You are scarcely
the bluff warrior you pass yourself off as."
 
Everard constructed a smile. "My lord in his wisdom knows well that an
unlettered tribesman is not necessarily a fool. To him I admit having, ah,
earlier shaded the truth a wee bit. 'Twas because I had to, even as any
Tyrian tradesman does in the normal course of business. Is that not so?"
 
Hiram laughed and relaxed. "Say on. If you are a rogue, you are at least an
interesting one."
 
Patrol psychologists had invested considerable thought in Everard's yarn.
There was no way for it to be immediately convincing, nor was that desirable;
the king should not be stampeded into actions that might change known
history. Yet the tale must be sufficiently plausible that he would cooperate
in the investigation which was Everard's real purpose.
 
"Know, then, O lord, that my father was a chieftain in a mountain land far
over the waves -" the Hallstatt region" of Austria.
 
Eborix went on to relate how various Celts who had been among the Sea Peoples
fled back there after the shattering defeat which Rameses III inflicted on
those quasi-vikings in 1149 B.C. Their descendants had maintained tenuous
connection, mostly along the amber route, with the descendants of kinsmen who
settled in Canaan by leave of victorious Pharaoh. Old ambitions were
unfor-gotten; Celts have always had a long racial memory. Talk went on about
reviving the great Mediterranean push. That dream strengthened as wave after
wave of barbarians came down into Greece, over the wreckage of Mycenaean
civilization, and chaos spread through the Adriatic and far into Anatolia.
 
Eborix knew of spies who had also served as emissaries to the kings of the
Philistine city-states. Tyre's amicability toward the Jews did not exactly
endear it to the Philistines; and of course the riches of Phoenicia provided
ever more temptation. Schemes developed fitfully, slowly, over a period of
generations. Eborix himself was not sure how far along arrangements might be,
to bring south an army of Celtic adventurers.
 
To Hiram he admitted frankly that he would have considered joining such a
troop, his hand-fast men at his back. However, a feud between clans had ended
in the overthrow and slaying of his father. Eborix had barely escaped alive.
Wanting revenge as much as he wanted to mend his fortunes, he made the trek
hither. A Tyre grateful for his warning might, if nothing else, give him the
means to hire soldiers of his own and bring them home to reinstate him.
 
"You offer me no proof," said the king slowly, "naught but your naked word."
 
Everard nodded. "My lord sees clearly as Ra, the Falcon of Egypt. Did I not
agree beforehand that I could be mistaken, that there may in truth be no real
menace, just the scutterings and chat-terings of vainglorious apes?
Nonetheless I do urge that my lord have the matter looked into as closely as
may be, for safety's sake. In that effort, 'tis I his servant that could be
of help. Not only do I know my folk and their ways, but in wandering across
their continent I met many different tribes, aye, and civilized nations too.
I might therefore be a better hound than most, upon this particular scent."
 
Hiram tugged his beard. "Perhaps. Such a conspiracy must needs involve more
than a few wild mountaineers and Philistine magnates. Men of several origins
- But foreigners come and go like vagrant breezes. Who shall track the wind?"
 
Everard's heart slugged. Here was the moment toward which he had striven.
"Your highness, I've thought much upon this, and the gods have sent me some
ideas. I'm thinking we should first search not for common merchants,
skippers, and seamen, but for strangers from lands which Tyrians have seldom
or never visited, strangers who ask questions that often do not pertain to
trade, or even to ordinary inquisitiveness. They would be inserting
themselves into high places as well as low, seeking to learn everything. Does
my lord recall any such?"
 
Hiram shook his head. "No, none unaccountable like that. And I would have
heard about them and wanted to see them. My followers are aware of how I
always hunger for new knowledge, fresh news." He chuckled. "As witness the
fact I was willing to receive you."
 
Everard swallowed his disappointment. It tasted sour. But I shouldn't have
imagined the enemy would be openly active now, this close to the time when
he's going to strike. He'd know the Patrol would be busy. No, he'd do his
preliminary research, acquire his detailed information about Phoenicia and
its vulnerabilities, earlier. Maybe quite a bit earlier.
 
"My lord," he said, "if there is indeed a menace, it must have been a long
while in the egg. Dare I ask your highness to think back? The king in his
omniscience might recollect something from years agone."
 
Hiram lowered his gaze and concentrated. Sweat prickled Everard's skin. He
forced himself to sit still. Finally, softly, he heard:
 
"Well, late in the reign of my illustrious father King Abibaal. . . yes ...
he had certain guests for a spell, about whom rumors flew. They were not of
any land familiar to us. . . . Seekers of wisdom from the Far East, they
said. . . . What was the name of their country? Shee-an? No, belike not."
Hiram sighed. "Memory fades. Especially memory of mere words."
 
"My lord did not meet them himself, then?" "No, I was gone, spending some
years in travel through our hinterlands and abroad, so as to prepare myself
for the throne. And now Abibaal sleeps with his fathers. As, I fear, do
well-nigh all who may have encountered those men."
 
Everard suppressed a sigh of his own and struggled to ease off. The lead was
fog-tenuous, if it was a lead. But what could he expect? The enemy wouldn't
have left engraved announcements.
 
Nobody here kept journals or saved letters, nor did anybody number years in
the manner of later civilizations. Everard would not be able to learn
precisely when Abibaal entertained his curious visitors. The Patrolman would
be lucky to find one or two individuals who remembered them well. Hiram had
reigned for two decades now, and life expectancy was not great.
 
I've got to try, though. It's the single lonely clue I've turned up. Or else
it's a false scent, of course. Those could have been legitimate
contemporaries - explorers from Chou Dynasty China, maybe.
 
He cleared his throat. "Does my lord grant permission for his servant to ask
questions, in the royal household as well as in the city? I'm thinking that
humble folk might speak a little more free and open before a plain fellow
like me, than they would in the awe of his highness' presence."
 
Hiram smiled. "For a plain fellow, Eborix, you've a smooth tongue. But - yes,
you may try. Abide for a while as my guest, with your young footman whom I
noticed outside. We'll talk further. If nothing else, you are a fanciful
talker."
 
 
 
A page conducted Everard and Pum through corridors to their quarters, as
evening closed in. "The noble visitor will dine with the guards officers and
men of like rank, unless he is bidden to the royal board," he explained
obsequiously. "His attendant is welcome at the freeborn servants' mess. If
aught be desired, let him only inform a butler or steward; his highness'
generosity knows no bounds."
 
Everard resolved not to try that generosity too far. The household seemed
more status-conscious than Tyrians generally were - no doubt the presence of
many out-and-out slaves reinforced that - but Hiram was probably not above
thrift.
 
Yet when the Patrolman reached his room, he found that the king was a
thoughtful host. Hiram must have issued orders after their discussion, while
the newcomers were shown the sights of the palace and given a light supper.
 
The chamber was large, well-furnished, lit by several lamps. A window, which
could be shuttered, overlooked a court where flowers and pomegranates grew.
Doors were solid wood on bronze hinges. The interior one stood open on an
adjacent cubicle, sufficient for a straw tick and a pot, where Pum would
sleep.
 
Everard halted. Lamplight fell soft over carpet, draperies, chairs, a table,
a cedar chest, a double, bed. Shadows stirred as a young woman rose and
genuflected.
 
"Does my lord wish more?" asked the page. "If not, let this lowly person bid
him a good night." He bowed and departed.
 
Breath hissed between Pum's teeth. "Master, she's beautiful!"
 
Everard's cheeks smoldered. "Uh-huh. Goodnight to you, too, lad."
 
"Noble sir-"
 
"Goodnight, I said."
 
Pum rolled eyes toward the ceiling, shrugged elaborately, and trudged to his
kennel. The door slammed behind him.
 
"Stand straight, my dear," Everard mumbled. "Don't be afraid. I'd never hurt
you."
 
The woman obeyed, arms crossed over bosom and head meekly lowered. She was
tall for this milieu, slender, stacked. The wispy gown decked a fair skin.
The hair knotted loosely at her nape was ruddy-brown. Feeling almost
diffident, he laid a finger beneath her chin. She lifted a face that was
blue-eyed, pert-nosed, full-lipped, piquantly freckled.
 
"Who are you?" he wondered. His throat felt tight.
 
"Your handmaiden sent to attend you, lord." Her words bore a lilting foreign
accent. "What is your pleasure?"
 
"I ... I asked who you are. Your name, your people."
 
"They call me Pleshti, master."
 
"Because they can't pronounce your real name. I'll be bound, or won't bother
to. What is it?"
 
She swallowed. Tears glimmered. "I was Bron-wen once," she whispered.
 
Everard nodded to himself. Glancing around, he saw a jug of wine as well as
water on the table, plus a beaker and a bowl of fruit. He took her hand. It
lay small and tender in his. "Come," he said, "let's sit down, take
refreshment, get acquainted. We'll share yon glass."
 
She shuddered and half shrank away. Sadness touched him afresh, though he
achieved a smile. "Don't be afraid, Bronwen. I'm not leading up to anything
that could hurt you. I simply wish us to be friends. You see, macushla, I
think you're of my folk."
 
She fought off the weeping, squared her shoulders, and gulped, "My lord is,
is g-godlike in his kindness. How shall I ever thank him?"
 
Everard led her to the table, got her seated, and poured. Before long her
story came forth.
 
It was all too ordinary. Though her concepts of geography were vague, he
deduced that she belonged to a Celtic tribe which had migrated south from the
Danubian Urheimat. Hers was a village at the head of the Adriatic Sea, and
she had been the daughter of a well-to-do yeoman, as Bronze Age primitives
reckoned prosperity.
 
She hadn't counted birthdays before nor years after, but he figured she was
about thirteen when the Tyrians came, about a decade ago. They were in a
single ship, boldly questing north in search of new trade possibilities. They
camped on the shore and dickered in sign language. Evidently they decided
there was nothing worth coming back for, because when they left, they
kidnapped several children who had wandered near to look at the marvelous
foreigners. Bronwen was among them.
 
The Tyrians hadn't raped their female captives, nor mistreated any of either
sex more than they found necessary. A virgin in sound condition was worth too
much on the slave market. Everard admitted that he couldn't even call the
sailors evil. They had just done what came naturally in the ancient world,
and most subsequent history for that matter.
 
Bronwen lucked out, everything considered. She was acquired for the palace:
not the royal harem, though the king had had her unofficially a few times,
but for him to lend to such house guests as he would favor. Men were seldom
deliberately cruel to her. The pain that never ended lay in being captive
among aliens.
 
That, and her children. She had borne four over the years, of whom two died
in infancy - a good record, especially when they hadn't cost her much in the
way of teeth or health. The surviving pair were still small. The girl would
probably become a concubine too when she reached puberty, unless she was
passed on to a brothel. (Slave women did not get deflowered as a religious
rite. Who cared about their fortunes in later life?) The boy would probably
be castrated at that age, since his upbringing at court would have made him a
potential harem attendant.
 
As for Bronwen, when she lost her looks she'd be assigned to labor. Not
having been trained in skills such as weaving, she'd likeliest end in the
scullery or at a quern.
 
Everard had to coax all this out of her, piece by harsh little piece. She
didn't lament nor beg. Her fate was what it was. He remembered a line
Thucydides would pen centuries hence, about the disastrous Athenian military
expedition whose last members ended their days in the mines of Sicily.
"Having done what men could, they suffered what men must."
 
And women. Especially women. He wondered if, way down inside, he had
Bronwen's courage. He doubted it.
 
About himself he was short-spoken. After avoiding one Celt and then getting
another thrust upon him, so to speak, he felt he'd better play very close to
his vest.
 
Nonetheless, at last she looked at him, flushed, aglow, and said in a
slightly wine-slurred voice, "Oh, Eborix -" He couldn't follow the rest.
 
"I fear my tongue is too unlike yours, my dear," he said.
 
She returned to Punic: "Eborix, how generous of Asherat that she brought me
to you for, for whatever time she grants. How wonderful. Now come, sweet
lord, let your handmaiden give you back some of the joy -" She rose, came
around the table, cast her warmth and suppleness into his lap.
 
He had already consulted his conscience. If he didn't do what everybody
expected, word was bound to reach the king. Hiram might well take umbrage, or
wonder what was wrong with his guest. Bronwen herself would be hurt,
bewildered; she might get in trouble. Besides, she was lovely, and he'd been
much deprived. Poor Sarai scarcely counted.
 
He gathered Bronwen to him.
 
Intelligent, observant, sensitive, she had well learned how to please a man.
He hadn't figured on more than once, but she changed his mind about that,
more than once. Her own ardor didn't seem faked, either. Well, he was
probably the first man who had ever tried to please her. After the second
round, she whispered brokenly into his ear: "I've . . . borne no further . .
. these past three years. How I am praying the goddess will open my womb for
you, Eborix, Eborix -"
 
He didn't remind her that any such child would be a slave also.
 
Yet before they slept she murmured something else, which he thought she might
well not have let slip if she were fully awake: "We have been one flesh
tonight, my lord, and may we be so often again. But know that I know we are
not of one people."
 
"What?" An iciness stabbed him. He sat bolt upright.
 
She snuggled close. "Lie down, my heart. Never, never will I betray you. But
... I remember enough things from home, small things, and I do not believe
Geyils in the mountains can be that different from Geyils by the sea. . . .
Hush, hush, your secret is safe. Why should Bronwen Brannoch's daughter
betray the only person here who ever cared about her? Sleep, my nameless
darling, sleep well in my arms."
 
 
 
At dawn a servant roused Everard - apologizing, flattering all the while -
and took him away to a hot bath. Soap was for the future, but a sponge and a
pumice stone scrubbed his skin, and afterward the servant gave him a rubdown
with fragrant oil and a deft shave. He met the guards officers, then, for a
meager breakfast and lively conversation.
 
"I'm going off duty today," proposed a man among them. "What say we ferry
over to Usu, friend Eborix? I'll show you around. Later, if daylight remains,
we can go for a ride outside the walls." Everard wasn't sure whether that
would be on donkeyback or, more swiftly if less comfortably, in a war
chariot. To date, horses were almost always draught animals, too valuable for
any purposes but combat and pomp.
 
"Many thanks," the Patrolman answered. "First, though, I've need to see a
woman called Sarai. She works in the steward's department."
 
Brows lifted. "What," scoffed a soldier, "do you Northerners prefer grubby
housekeepers to the king's choice?"
 
What a gossipy village the palace is, Everard thought. I'd better restore my
reputation fast. He sat straight, cast a cold look across the table, and
growled, "I am present at the king's behest, to conduct inquiries that are no
concern of anybody else's. Is that clear, gossoon?"
 
"Oh, yes, oh, yes! I did but jest, noble sir. Wait, I'll go find somebody
who'll know where she is." The man scrambled from his bench.
 
Guided to an offside room, Everard had a few minutes alone. He spent them
reflecting upon his sense of urgency. Theoretically, he had as much time as
he wanted; if need be, he could always double back, provided he took care to
keep people from seeing him next to himself. In practice, that entailed risks
acceptable only in the worst emergencies. Besides the chance of starting a
causal, loop that might expand out of control, there was the possibility of
something going wrong in the mundane course of events. The likelihood of that
would increase as the operation grew more long-drawn" and complex. Then too,
he had a natural impatience to get on with his job, complete it, nail down
the existence of the world that begot him.
 
A dumpy figure parted the door curtain. Sarai knelt before him. "Your adorer
awaits her lord's bidding," she said in a slightly uneven voice.
 
"Rise," Everard told her. "Be at ease. I want no more than to ask a question
or two of you."
 
Her eyelids fluttered. She blushed to the end of her large nose. "Whatever my
lord commands, she who owes him so much shall strive to fulfill."
 
He understood she was being neither slavish nor coquettish. She neither
invited nor expected forwardness on his part. Once she had made her sacrifice
to the goddess, a pious Phoenician woman stayed chaste. Sarai was simply,
humbly grateful to him. He felt touched.
 
"Be at ease," he repeated. "Let your mind roam free. On behalf of the king, I
seek knowledge of certain men who once visited his father, late in the life
of glorious Abibaal."
 
Her gaze widened. "Master, I can scarcely have been born."
 
"I know. But what of older attendants? You must know everybody on the staff.
A few might remain who served in those days. Would you inquire among them?"
 
She touched brow, lips, bosom, the sign of obedience. "Since my lord wills
it."
 
He passed on what scant information he had. It disturbed her. "I fear- I fear
naught will come of this," she said. "My lord must have seen how much we make
of foreigners. If any were as peculiar as that, the servants would talk about
them for the rest of their days." She smiled wryly. "After all, we've no
great store of newness, we menials within the palace walls. We chew our
gossip over and over again. I think I would have heard about those men, were
anybody left who remembered them."
 
Everard cursed to himself in several languages. Looks like I'll have to go
back to Usu in person, twenty-odd years ago, and scratch around - regardless
of the danger of my machine getting detected by the enemy and alerting him,
or me getting killed. "Well," he said, strained, "ask anyway, will you? If
you learn nothing, that won't be your fault."
 
"No," she breathed, "but it will be my sorrow, kind lord." She knelt again
before she departed.
 
Everard went to join his acquaintance. He had no real hope of discovering a
clue on the mainland today, but the jaunt should work some tension out of him.
 
 
 
The sun was low when they came back to the island. A thin mist lay over the
sea, diffusing light, making the high walls of Tyre golden, not altogether
real, like an elven castle that might at any moment glimmer away into
nothingness. Landing, Everard found that most dwellers had gone home. The
soldier, who had a family, bade farewell, and the Patrolman made his way to
the palace through streets that, after their daytime bustle, seemed ghostly.
 
A dark shape stood beside the royal porch, ignored by the sentries. Those
climbed to their feet and hefted their spears as Everard approached, prepared
to check his identity. Standing at attention had never been thought of. The
woman scuttled to intercept him. As she bent the knee, he recognized Sarai.
 
His heart sprang. "What do you want?" ripped from him.
 
"Lord, I have been awaiting your return much of this day, for it seemed you
were anxious to get whatever word I might bear."
 
She must have delegated her regular duties. The street had been hot, hour
after hour. "You . . . have found something?"
 
"Perhaps, master; perhaps a scrap. Would it were more."
 
"Speak, for - for Melqart's sake!"
 
"For yours, lord, yours, since you did ask this of your servant." Sarai drew
breath. Her gaze met his, and stayed. Her tone became strong, matter-of-fact:
 
"As I feared, of those few retainers who are old enough, none had the
knowledge you seek. They had not yet entered service, or if they had, they
worked elsewhere for King Abibaal than at the palace - on a farm or a summer
estate or some such place. At best, a man or two said he might have heard a
little talk once; but what he remembered about that was no more than what my
lord had already conveyed to me. I despaired, until I thought to seek a
shrine of Asherat. I prayed that she be gracious unto you who had served her
through me, when for so long no other man would. And lo, she answered.
Praises be unto her. I recalled that an under-groom named Jantin-hamu has a
father alive, who was formerly on the steward's staff. I sought Jantin-hamu
out, and he brought me to Bomilcar, and, aye, Bomilcar can tell about those
strangers."
 
"Why, that, that is splendid," he blurted. "I don't believe I myself could
ever have done what you did. I wouldn't have known."
 
"Now I pray that this may prove to be in truth helpful to my lord," she said
mutedly, "he who was good to an ugly hill-woman. Come, I will guide you."
 
In filial piety, Jantin-hamu gave his father a place in the one-room
apartment he shared with his wife and a couple of children still dependent on
them. A single lamp picked out, through monstrous shadows, the straw pallets,
stools, clay jugs, brazier that were about all the furniture. The woman
cooked in a kitchen shared with other tenants, then brought the food, here to
eat; the air was close and greasy. Everybody else squatted, staring, while
Everard interrogated Bomilcar.
 
The old man was bald except for white remnants of beard, toothless, half
deaf, gnarled and crippled by arthritis, eyes turned milky by cataracts. (His
chronological age must be about sixty. So much for the back-to-nature crowd
in twentieth-century America.) He hunched on a stool, hands weakly clasped
around a stick. His mind worked, though - reached forth out of the ruin where
it was trapped like a plant reaching for sunlight.
 
"Aye, aye, they come and stand before me as I speak, as if 'twere yesterday.
Could I but remember that well what happened in the real yesterday. Well,
nothing did, nothing ever does any more. . . . "Seven, they were, who said
they had come on a ship from the Hittite coast. Now young Matinbaal got
curious, he did, and went down and asked around, and never found a skipper
who'd carried any such passengers. Well, maybe 'twas a ship that went right
onward, toward Philistia or Egypt. . . . Sinim they called themselves, and
told of faring thousands upon thousands of leagues from the Sunrise Lands,
that they might bring home an account of the world to their king. They spoke
fair Punic, albeit with an accent like none else I ever heard. . . . Taller
than most, well-built; they walked like wildcats, and were as mannerly and, I
guessed, as dangerous if aroused. No beards; 'twasn't that they shaved, their
faces were hairless, like women's. Not eunuchs, however, no, the wenches lent
'em were soon sitting down careful, heh, heh. Their eyes were light, their
skins whiter even than a yellow-haired Achaean's, but their straight locks
were raven-black. . . . Ever there was an air of wizardry about them, and I
heard tales of eldritch things they'd shown the king. Be that as it may, they
did no harm, they were only curious, oh, how curious about every least thing
in Usu, and about the plans that were then being drawn up for Tyre. They won
the king's heart; he commanded they see and hear whatever they liked, though
it be the deepest secrets of a sanctuary or a merchant house. ... I did often
wonder, afterward, if this was what provoked the gods against them."
 
Judas priest! slashed through Everard. That's almost got to be my enemies.
Yes, them, Exalta-tionists, Varagan's gang. "Sinim"- Chinese? A red herring,
in case the Patrol stumbled onto their trail? No, I suspect not, I think
probably they just used that alias so as to have a readymade story to hand
Abibaal and his court. For they didn't bother to disguise their appearance.
As in South America, Varagan must have felt sure his cleverness would be too
much for the plodding Patrol. Which it might well have been, except for Sarai.
 
Not that I'm very far along on the trail yet.
 
"What became of them?" he demanded..
 
"Ah, that was a pity, unless it was punishment for something wrong they did,
like maybe poking into a Holy of Holies." Bomilcar clicked his tongue and
wagged his head. "After several weeks, they asked leave to go. Twas late in
the season, most ships were already put away for the winter, but against
advice they offered a rich payment for passage to Cyprus, and got a daring
skipper to agree. I went down to the wharf myself to watch them depart, I
did. A cold, blustery day, 'twas. I watched that ship dwindle away under the
racing clouds till she vanished in the brume, and something made me stop by
the temple of Tanith on my way back and put oil in a lamp - not for them,
understand, but for all poor mariners, on whom rests the well-being of Tyre."
 
Everard restrained himself from shaking that withered frame. "And then?
Anything?"
 
"Aye, my feeling was right. My feelings have always been right, haven't they,
Jantin-hamu? Always. I should've been a priest, but too many boys were trying
for what few acolytes' berths there were. . . . Ah, yes. That day a gale
sprang up. The ship foundered. Everybody lost. I heard about that, I did,
because we naturally wanted to know what'd happened to those strangers. Her
figurehead and some other bits and pieces drifted onto the rocks where this
city now is."
 
"But - wait, gaffer - are you sure everybody drowned?"
 
"No, I suppose I couldn't swear to that, no. I suppose a man or two could've
clung to a plank and been borne ashore likewise. They'd've made landfall
elsewhere and trudged home unremarked. Who in the palace cares about a common
sailor? Certain is, the ship was lost, and the Sinim - for if they'd
returned, we'd know, wouldn't we, now?" Everard's mind whirred. Time
travelers might well have arrived here by machine, directly. The Patrol base,
with instruments to detect it, wasn't yet established. (We can't man every
instant of the millennia. At best, at need, we send agents back and forth
within a milieu, out of those stations we do keep.) If they weren't to cause
a sensation that would endure, though, they would have to depart in
contemporary wise, by land or sea. But surely, before embarking, they'd have
checked out what the weather was going to be like. Ships in this age
practically never sail during the winter; they're too fragile.
 
Could this be a false scent regardless? Bomilcar's memory may not be as clear
as he claims. And the visitors could have been from one of those odd,
short-lived little civilizations that history and archaeology afterward lost
sight of, and time-traveling scientists discover mainly by accident. For
instance, a city-state off in the Anatolian mountains somewhere, which'd
learned things from the Hittites, and whose aristocracy is so inbred that its
members have a unique physiognomy -
 
On the other hand, of course, this could be the real means of breaking the
trail, this shipwreck. That would explain why enemy agents didn't trouble to
make themselves look Chinese.
 
How to find out, before Tyre explodes?
 
"When did this happen, Bomilcar?" he asked as gently as he was able.
 
"Why, I told you," the old man said. "Back in the days of King Abibaal, when
I worked for his steward in the palace in Usu."
 
Everard felt acutely, annoyingly conscious of the family around and their
eyes. He heard them breathe. The lamp guttered, shadows thickened, the air
was cooling fast. "Could you tell me more closely?" he pursued. "Do you
recall which year of Abibaal's reign it was?"
 
"No. No. Nor anything else special. Let me think. . . . Was it two years, or
three, after Captain Rib-adi brought back such a treasure trove from - from -
where was it? Somewhere beyond Tharshish. . . . No, wasn't that later? . . .
My first wife died in childbed a while afterward, that I remember, but 'twas
several years before I could arrange a second marriage, and meanwhile I had
to make do with harlots, heh, heh. ..." With the abruptness of the aged,
Bomilcar's mood changed. Tears trickled forth. "And my second wife, my
Batbaal, she died too, of a fever. . . . Crazed, she was, didn't know me any
longer. . . . Don't plague me, my lord, don't plague me, leave me in peace
and darkness and the gods will bless you."
 
I'll get nothing further here. What did I get? Maybe nothing.
 
Before he went, Everard made Jantin-hamu a present of metal which should
allow the family to live in more comfort. The ancient world had some few
advantages over his; it was free of gift and income taxes.
 
 
 
A couple of hours past sunset, Everard returned to the palace. That was late
in local eyes. The sentries raised rushlights, squinted at him, and summoned
their officer. When Eborix had been identified, they let him in with
apologies. His indulgent laugh was better than a large tip would have been.
 
He didn't really feel like laughing. Lips gone tight, he followed a lamp
bearer to his room.
 
Bronwen lay asleep. A single flame still burned. He undressed and stood for a
minute or three looking down at her through the flickery dimness. Unbound,
her hair glowed across the pillow. One arm, out of the blanket, didn't quite
cover a bare young breast. It was her face he regarded, though. How innocent
she looked, childlike, woundable even now, even after everything she had
endured.
 
If only. No. We may be a little bit in love already. But no possible way
could it last, could we ever really live together, unless as a mere pair of
bodies. Too much time sunders us.
 
What shall become of her?
 
He started to get into bed, intending simply slumber. She roused. Slaves
learn to sleep alertly. He saw joy blossom in her. "My lord! Welcome, a
thousand welcomes!"
 
They held each other close. Just the same, he found he wanted to talk with
her. "How did your day go?" he asked into the warmth where her jaw met her
ear.
 
"What? I - O master -" She was surprised that he would ask. "Why, it was
pleasant, surely because your dear magic lingered. Your servant Pummairam and
I chatted a long while." She giggled. "He's an engaging scoundrel, isn't he?
Some of his questions struck too near the bone, but have no fear, my lord;
those I refused to answer, and he backed off at once. Later I sallied forth,
leaving word where I could be found should my lord return, and spent the
afternoon in the nursery where my children are. They are such darlings." She
didn't venture to inquire if he would care to meet them.
 
"Hm." A thought nudged Everard. "What did Pum do meanwhile?" I can't see him
sitting idle all day, that squirrel.
 
"I know not. Well, I glimpsed him twice, on his errands down the corridors,
but took it for given that my lord must have commanded -My lord?" Alarmed,
she sat straight as Everard left the bed. He flung open the door to the
cubicle. It stood empty. What in hell was Pum up to?
 
Perhaps nothing much. Yet a servant who got into mischief might cause trouble
for his master. Standing there in a brown study, the floor cold beneath his
feet, Everard grew aware of arms around his waist, and a cheek stroking
across his shoulderblades, and a voice that crooned: "Is my lord overly
weary? If so, let his handmaiden sing him a lullaby from her homeland. But if
not -"
 
To hell with my worries. They'll keep. Everard turned his attention
elsewhere, and himself.
 
 
 
The boy was still missing when the man awoke. Discreet questions revealed
that he had spent hours the day before, talking with various members of the
staff. They agreed he was inquisitive and amusing. Finally he had gone out,
and no one had seen him since.
 
Probably he got restless and flitted off to spend what I've given him in the
wineshops and cat-houses. Too bad. In spite of his scapegrace style, I
thought he was basically reliable, and meant to do something or other that'd
give him a chance at a better life. Never mind. I've Patrol business on hand.
 
Everard excused himself from further activities and went alone into the city.
As a hireling admitted him to the house of Zakarbaal, Yael Zorach appeared.
Phoenician dress and hairdo became her charmingly well, but he was too
preoccupied to appreciate it. The same strain showed on her features. "This
way," she said, unwontedly curt, and led him to the inner chambers.
 
Her husband sat in conference with a craggy-faced, bushy-bearded man whose
costume varied in numerous ways from local male dress. "Oh, Manse," Chaim
exclaimed. "What a relief. I wondered if we'd have to send for you, or what."
He switched to Temporal: "Agent Manson Everard, Unattached, let me present
Epsilon Korten, director of Jerusalem Base."
 
The other man rose in a future-military fashion and snapped a salute. "An
honor, sir," he said. Nonetheless, his rank was not much below Ever-ard's. He
was responsible for temporal activities throughout the Hebrew lands, between
the birth of David and the fall of Judah. Tyre might be more important in
secular history, but it would never draw a tenth of the visitors from uptime
that Jerusalem and its environs did. The position he held told Everard
immediately that he was both a man of action and a scholar of profundity.
 
"I'll have Hanai bring in refreshments, and then tell the household to stay
out of here and not let anybody in," Yael proposed.
 
Everard and Korten spent those minutes getting an acquaintance started. The
latter was born in twenty-ninth century New Edom on Mars. While he didn't
brag, Everard gathered that his computer analyses of early Semitic texts had
joined his exploits as a spaceman in the Second Asteroid War to attract
Patrol recruiters. They sounded him out, got him to take tests which proved
him trustworthy, revealed the existence of the organization, accepted his
enlistment, trained him - the usual procedure. What was less usual was his
level of competence. In many ways, his job was more demanding than Everard's.
 
"You'll understand that this situation is especially alarming to my office,"
he said when the foursome had settled down by themselves. "If Tyre is
destroyed, Europe may take decades to show any major effects, the rest of the
world centuries - millennia, in the Americas or Australasia. But it will be
an immediate catastrophe for Solomon's kingdom. Lacking Hiram's support and
the prestige it confers, he probably can't hold his tribes together long; and
without Tyre at their backs, the Philistines won't be slow to seek revenge.
Judaism, Yahwistic monotheism, is new and frail, still half pagan. My
extrapolation is that it won't survive either. Yahweh will sink to being one
more character in a crude and mutable pantheon." "And there goes a good deal
of Classical civilization," Everard added. "Judaism influenced philosophy as
well as events among both the Alexandrine Greeks and the Romans. Obviously,
no Christianity, therefore no Western civilization, or Byzantine, or any of
their successors. No telling what will arise instead." He thought of another
altered world, which he had helped abort, and a wound twinged that he would
bear throughout his life.
 
"Yes, of course," said Korten impatiently. "The point is, granted that the
resources of the Patrol are finite - and, yes, spread terribly thin over a
continuum that has many nexuses as critical as this one - I don't believe it
should concentrate all available effort on rescuing Tyre. If that happens,
and we fail, everything is lost; the chances of our being able to restore the
original world become vanishingly small. No, let us establish a strong
standby - personnel, organization, plans - in Jerusalem, ready to minimize
the effects there. The less that Solomon's kingdom suffers, the less powerful
the change vortex will be. That should give us more likelihood of damping it
out altogether."
 
"Do you mean to, to write Tyre off?" Yael asked, dismayed.
 
"No, certainly not. But I do want us to have some insurance against its loss."
 
"That in itself is playing fast and loose with history." Chaim's tone
trembled.
 
"I know. But extreme situations call for extreme measures. I came here first
to discuss it with you, but please be advised that I intend to press for this
policy in the highest echelons." Korten turned to Everard. "Sir, I regret the
need to reduce further the slender resources you have at your command, but my
judgment is that we must."
 
"They aren't slender," the American grumbled, "they're downright emaciated."
Following the preliminary legwork, what has the Patrol got here other than me?
 
Does that mean the Danellians know I'll succeed? Or does it mean they'll
agree with Korten - even, that Tyre is "already" doomed? If 1 fail - if I die
-
 
He straightened, reached into his pouch for pipe and tobacco, and said: "My
lady and gentlemen, this could too easily turn into a shouting match. Let's
talk it over like reasonable people. The beginning of that is to assemble
what hard facts we have, and look at them. Not that I've collected many so
far."
 
The debate went on for hours. It was afternoon before Yael suggested they
break for food. "Thanks," Everard said, "but I think I'd better get back to
the palace. Otherwise Hiram might suspect I'm loafing, at his expense. I'll
check in again tomorrow, okay?"
 
The truth was that he had no appetite for the usual heavy meal of the day,
roast lamb or whatever else it would be. He'd rather get a slab of bread and
a hunk of goat cheese at some foodstall, while he tried to sort out this new
problem. (Thank technology again. Without the gene-tailored protective
microbes the Patrol medics had implanted in him, he'd never have dared touch
local stuff that wasn't cooked dead. And vaccinations against every sort of
disease that came and went through the ages would long since have overloaded
his immune system.)
 
Twentieth-century style, he shook hands all around. Korten might be wrong, or
he might not be, but he was pleasant, able, and well-intentioned. Everard
went forth into a street that brooded and simmered beneath the sun.
 
Pum waited. He rose less exuberantly than before. An odd gravity was on the
thin young face. "Master," he breathed, "can we talk unheard?"
 
They found themselves a tavern where they were the only customers. In
actuality, it was a lean-to roof shading a small area on which cushions lay;
you sat cross-legged, and the landlord fetched clay goblets of wine from
inside his home. Everard paid him in beads, after desultory haggling. Foot
traffic swarmed and babbled up and down the street on which the shop
intruded, but at this hour men were generally busied. They'd relax here,
those who could afford to, when cooling shadows had fallen between the walls.
 
Everard sipped the thin, sour drink and grimaced. In his opinion, nobody
understood wine before about the seventeenth century A.D. Beer was worse. No
matter. "Speak, son," he said. "And you needn't waste breath or time calling
me the radiance of the universe and offering to lie down for me to wipe my
feet on. What have you been doing?"
 
Pum gulped, shivered, leaned forward. "O lord of mine," he began, and his
voice broke in an adolescent squeak, "your underling has dared take much upon
his head. Upbraid me, beat me, have me whipped, whatever your will may be, if
I have transgressed. But never, I beg, never think I have sought anything but
your welfare. My sole wish is to serve you as far as my poor abilities allow."
 
A brief grin flashed. "You see, you pay so well!"
 
Soberness returned: "You are a strong man, a man of great powers, in whose
service I may hope to flourish. Now for that, I must prove myself worthy. Any
lout can carry your baggage or lead you to a pleasure house. What can
Pum-mairam do, over and above this, that my lord will wish to keep him as a
retainer? Well, what does my lord require? What does he need?
 
"Master, it pleases you to pose as a rude tribesman, but from the very first
I had a feeling there was far more to you. Of course you would not confide in
a chance-met guttersnipe. So, without knowledge of you, how could I tell what
use I might be?"
 
Yeah, Everard thought, in his kind of hand-to-mouth existence, he had to
develop a pretty keen intuition, or else go under. He kept his tone mild: "I
am not angry. But tell me what you did."
 
Pum's big, russet-hued eyes met his and stayed, almost as equal to equal. "I
made bold to query others about my master. Always carefully, never letting
out what my purpose was or, in sooth, letting the person suspect what he or
she revealed. As proof of this, has anyone seemed to doubt my lord?"
 
"M-m ... no ... not any more than I could expect. Who did you talk with?"
 
"Well, the lovely Pleshti -Bo-ron-u-wen, for a start." Pum lifted a palm.
"Master! She said never a word you would not have approved. I read her face,
her movements, while I asked certain questions. No more. She refused me
answers, now and then, herself, and those refusals told me something too. And
her body does not know how to keep secrets. Is that her fault?"
 
"No." Also, I wouldn't be surprised but what you reopened your door a crack
that night and eavesdropped. Never mind. 1 don't want to know.
 
"Thus I learned you are not of the . . . the Geyil folk, is that their name?
It was no surprise. I had already guessed as much. You see, although I am
sure my master is terrible in battle, he is as forbearing with women as a
mother with her child. Would a half-savage wanderer be?"
 
Everard laughed ruefully. Touche! On previous missions, he'd sometimes heard
remarks about his lack of normal callousness, but nobody else had drawn
conclusions from it.
 
Encouraged, Pum hurried on: "I shan't weary my lord with details. Menials are
always watching the mighty, and love to gossip about them. I may have
deceived Sarai the housekeeper a tiny bit. Since I was your footman, she saw
no reason to bid me begone. Not that I asked her very much directly. That
would have been both foolish and unnecessary. I was content to get myself
steered toward the dwelling of Jantin-hamu, where they were agog over their
visitor yesterday eventide. Thus did I get a hint of what it is my lord
seeks."
 
He puffed himself up. "That, resplendent master, was what his servant
required. I hied myself down to the docks and started gadding about. Lo!"
 
A billow passed through Everard. "What did you find?" he nearly yelled.
 
"What," Pum declaimed, "but a man who lived through the shipwreck and
onslaught of demons?"
 
 
 
Gisgo appeared to be in his mid-forties, short but wiry, his weathered
nutcracker face full of life. Over the years, he had risen from deckhand to
coxswain, a skilled and well-rewarded post. Over the years, too, his cronies
had tired of hearing about his remarkable experience. They took it for just
another tall tale, anyway.
 
Everard appreciated what a fantastic piece of detective work Pum had done,
tracing the man down by getting sailors in wineshops to talk about who told
what kind of yarns. He himself could never have managed it; they'd have been
too leery of such an outsider, who moreover was a royal guest. Like sensible
people throughout history, the average Phoenician wanted as little to do with
his government as possible.
 
It had been a lucky break that Gisgo was home in voyaging season. However, he
had attained enough seniority and saved enough wealth that he need no more
join long expeditions, hazardous and uncomfortable. His ship was on the Egypt
run, and took layovers between passages.
 
In his neat fifth-floor apartment, his two wives brought refreshments while
he lolled back and spouted at his guests. A window gave on a court between
tenements. The view was of clay walls and laundry strung on lines between.
Yet sunlight came in alongside an eddy of breeze, to touch souvenirs of many
a trip - a miniature Babylonian cherub, a syrinx from Greece, a faience
hippopotamus from the Nile, an Iberian juju, a leaf-shaped bronze dagger from
the North. . . . Everard had made a substantial golden gift, and the mariner
waxed expansive.
 
"Aye," Gisgo said, "that was an eldritch journey, 'twas. Bad time of year,
equinox drawing nigh, and those there Sinim from who knows where, carrying
misfortune in their bones for aught we knew. But we were young, the whole
crew of us, from the captain on down; we reckoned on wintering in Cyprus,
where the wines are strong and the girls are sweet; those Sinim, they'd pay
well, they would. For that kind of metal, we were ready to give the fig to
death and hell. I've since grown wiser, but won't claim I'm gladder, no, no.
I'm still spry, but I feel the teeth gnawing, and believe me, my friends, it
was better to be young."
 
He signed himself. "The poor lads who went down, may their shades rest
peaceful." With a glance at Pum: "One of them looked like you, younker. Gave
me a start, you did, when first we met. Adiyaton, was that his name? Aye, I
think so. Maybe he was your grandsire?"
 
The boy gestured ignorance. He had no way of knowing.
 
"I've made my offerings for the lot of them, I have," Gisgo went on, "as well
as in thanks for my own deliverance. Always stand by your friends and pay
your debts, then the gods will help you in your need. They surely helped me.
 
"The Cyprus run is tricky at best. Can't make camp; it's overnight on the
open sea, sometimes for days on end if the wind's foul. This time - ah, this
time! Scarce were we beyond sight of land when the gale struck, and little
did it avail us to spread oil on those waters. Out oars and keep her head to
the waves, it was, till breath failed and sinews cracked but we must row
regardless. Black as a pig's bowels, it was, and howling and lashing and
rolling and pitching while the salt crusted my eyes and stung the cracks in
my lips - and how to keep stroke when we couldn't hear the cox's drum through
the wind?
 
"But on the midships catwalk I saw the chief of the Sinim, cloak flapping
about him, faced straight into the blast, and laughing, laughing!
 
"I don't know whether he was bold, or landlubber-ignorant of the danger, or
wiser than I then was in the ways of the sea. Afterward I've harked back, in
the light of much hard-won knowledge, and decided that with any luck we could
have ridden out the storm. That was a well-found ship, and her officers knew
their trade. However, the gods, or the demons, would have it otherwise.
 
"For suddenly, crack and blaze! The brightness blinded me. I lost hold of my
oar, like most of us did. Somehow I fumbled out and got a grip on it again
before it slid away between the tholes. That may have saved my sight, because
I wasn't looking up when the second bolt smote.
 
"Aye, we'd been hit by lightning. Twice. I'd heard no thunder, but maybe the
roar of the waves and shriek of the wind covered that. When the dazzle began
to clear from my eyes, I saw the mast aflame like a torch. The hull was
slashed and weakened. I felt the sea shiver my skull, and my arse, too, as it
broke the ship apart under me. "That scarce seemed to matter right away. For
by that fitful, ragged light I glimpsed things in heaven, like yonder winged
bull but huge as real oxen and ashine as if cast in iron. Men were astride
them. They swooped downward -
 
"Then everything went to pieces. I found myself in the water, clutching my
oar. A couple other men in my sight had got hold of flotsam also. But the
fury wasn't done with us. A lightning bolt struck down, straight into poor
Hurum-abi, my drinking friend since I was a kid. He must've been killed right
off. Me, I ducked below and held my breath as long's I could.
 
"When I must needs bring my nose up for air, I seemed to be alone in the sea.
But overhead was a swarm of those dragons or chariots or whatever they were,
a-dart through the wind. Flame raged between them. I went under again.
 
"I think they were soon gone to wherever in the Beyond they'd come from, but
I was too busy staying alive to pay any more heed. Finally I made it to land.
What had happened seemed unreal, like a mad dream. Maybe it was. I don't
know. What I do know is that I'm the single man on that ship who ever came
back. Praise Tanith, eh, girls?" Undaunted by memory, Gisgo pinched the
bottom of his nearest wife.
 
More reminiscence followed, which took a couple of hours to disentangle.
Finally Everard could ask, his tongue dry despite the wine: "Do you remember
just when this was? How many years ago?"
 
"Why, sure I do, sure I do," Gisgo answered. "An even one score and six
years, come fifteen days before the fall equinox, or pretty near to that."
 
He waved a hand. "How do I know, you wonder? Well, it's like the Egyptian
priests, that keep such a close calendar because their river floods and falls
every year. A seaman who doesn't take care, he's not likely to get old. Did
you know that beyond the Pillars of Melqart the sea rises and falls like the
Nile, but twice a day? You'd better watch those times sharp, if you'd fare in
those parts.
 
"But the Sinim, they were what really drove the idea home in this head. There
I was, attendant on my captain while they bargained with him for passage, and
they kept talking about exactly which day we'd depart -talking him into it,
you understand. I listened, and I thought what gains might lie in that kind
of remembering, and told myself I'd make a point of it. Back then, I couldn't
read or write, but what I could do was mark whatever special things happened
each year, and keep those happenings in order and count back over them when I
needed to. So this was the year in between a venture to the Red Cliff Shores
and the year when I caught the Babylonian disease -"
 
 
 
Everard and Pum emerged and began walking from the Sidonian Harbor quarter,
down a Street of the Ropemakers now filling with dusk and quietness, toward
the palace.
 
"My lord gathers his forces, I see," murmured the boy after a while.
 
The Patrolman nodded absently. His mind was in a storm of its own.
 
Varagan's procedure seemed clear to him. (Everard felt well-nigh certain it
was Merau Varagan, perpetrating a fresh enormity.) From wherever in
space-time his hideout was, he and half a dozen of his confederates had
sought the Usu area, twenty-six years ago. Others must have carried them on
hoppers, which let them off and immediately returned. The Patrol couldn't
hope to catch the vehicles in that brief an interlude, when the exact place
and moment were unknown. Varagan's band had gone afoot into town and
ingratiated themselves with King Abibaal.
 
They must have done this after bombing the temple, leaving the ransom note,
and probably making the attempt on Everard - after, that is, in terms of
their world lines, their continuity of experience. It would not have been
hard to pick such a target, or even plant such an assassin. Scientists
studying Tyre had written books which were readily available. The preliminary
mischief would give Varagan an idea as to the feasibility of his entire
scheme. Having decided that it would be worth a substantial investment of
lifespan and effort, he thereupon sought the detailed knowledge, the kind
that seldom gets into books, which he would need in order to do a really
thorough job of wrecking this society.
 
When they had learned as much at the court of Abibaal as they felt was called
for, Varagan and his followers left town in conventional wise, so as not to
engender stories among the people that would spread and persist and
eventually give the Patrol a lead. For the same reason, the dying out of
public interest in them, they wanted it thought that they had perished.
 
Hence their departure date, on which they had insisted; a scouting flight had
revealed that a storm would suddenly rise within hours. Those of the gang who
were to pick them up had fired energy beams to destroy the ship and kill the
witnesses. Had they not chanced to miss Gisgo, they would have covered their
tracks almost completely. In fact, without Sarai's assistance, Everard would
most likely never have heard of those Sinim who were unfortunately lost at
sea.
 
From his base, Varagan had "already" dispatched agents to keep an eye on
Patrol HQ in Tyre, as the time of his demonstration attack drew near. If such
a gunman succeeded in recognizing and killing one or more of the scarce,
valued Unattached officers, excellent! It would increase the probability of
the Exaltationists getting what they wanted - whether that be the matter
transmuter or the destruction of the Danel-lian future. Everard didn't think
Varagan cared which. Either would gratify his power hunger and Schadenfreude.
 
Well, but Everard had found the spoor. He could loose the hounds of the
Patrol - Can I?
 
He gnawed his Celtic mustache and thought irrelevantly how glad he'd be to
mow the damned fungus off, once this operation was finished. Will it be?
 
Outnumbered, outgunned, Varagan was not necessarily outsmarted. His scheme
had a built-in fail-safe that might be impossible to break.
 
The trouble was, the Phoenicians possessed neither clocks nor accurate
navigation instruments. Gisgo didn't know, any closer than a week or two,
when his ship suffered disaster; nor did he know, any closer than fifty miles
or so, where it had been at the time. Therefore Everard didn't.
 
Of course, the Patrol could easily ascertain the date, and the course for
Cyprus was known. But anything more precise required keeping watch from the
air nearby, didn't it? And the enemy must have detectors which would warn him
of that. The pilots who were to scuttle the ship and take away Vara-gan's
group could arrive prepared for a dogfight. They wouldn't need but a few
minutes to carry out their mission, then they'd be untraceably gone.
 
Worse, they might cancel the mission altogether. They could wait for a more
favorable instant to recover their associates - or, worse yet, do it at an
earlier time, before the ship ever sailed. In either case, Gisgo would not
have (had) the experience which Everard had just heard him relate. The trail
that the Patrolman had so painfully uncovered would never have existed.
Probably the long-range consequences to history would be trivial, but there
was no guarantee of that, once you started monkeying around with events.
 
For the same reasons, certain nullification of clues and possible upheaval in
the continuum, the Patrol could not anticipate Varagan's plan. It dared not,
for instance, swoop down on the ship and arrest the passengers before the
gale and the Exaltationists struck.
 
Looks like the only way we can proceed is to appear exactly where they are,
within that time-slot of five minutes or less when the riders carry out their
dirty work. But how are we to pinpoint it without alerting them?
 
"I think," said Pum, "my lord intends to do battle, in a strange realm where
wizards are his foes."
 
Am I that transparent to him? "Yes, it may be," Everard replied. "I'll first
recompense you well, for you've been a right-hand man to me."
 
The youth plucked his sleeve. "Lord," he implored, "let your servant follow
you."
 
Astounded, Everard stopped in mid-stride. "Huh?"
 
"I would not be parted from my master!" cried Pum. Tears gleamed in his eyes
and down his cheekbones. "Better death at his side - aye, better the demons
cast me down to hell - than return to that cockroach life you raised me from.
Teach me what I should do. You know I learn fast. I shall not be afraid. You
have made me into a man!"
 
By God, I do believe that for once his passion is perfectly genuine.
 
It's out of the question, of course. IS it? Everard stood thunderstruck. Pum
danced before him, laughing and weeping. "My lord will do it, my lord will
take me!"
 
And maybe, maybe, after this is all over, if he's survived - maybe we'll have
gained something very precious.
 
"The danger will be great," Everard said slowly. "Moreover, I await things
and happenings from which hardy warriors would flee, screaming. And earlier,
you'll have to acquire knowledge which, most of the wise men in this world
could not even understand, were it told them."
 
"Try me, my lord," answered Pum. A sudden calm had come upon him.
 
"I will! Let's go!" Everard strode so fast that the youth must trot to keep
up.
 
Basic indoctrination would take days, assuming Pum could handle it. That was
okay, though. It would take a while anyway to collect the necessary
intelligence and organize a task force. Besides, meanwhile there would be
Bronwen. Everard couldn't tell if he himself would live through the conflict.
Let him first receive whatever joy came his way, and try to give it back.
 
Captain Baalram was reluctant. "Why should I enroll your son?" he demanded.
"I've a full crew already, including two apprentices. This one is a
landlubber born, small, and scrawny."
 
"He's stronger than he seems," replied the man who called himself Adiyaton's
father. (A quarter century hence, he would call himself Zakarbaal.) "You'll
find him clever and willing. As for experience, everybody begins with none,
true? See here, sir. I'm anxious for him to get into a trading career. For
the sake of that, I'll be happy to ... make it worth your while personally."
 
"Well, now." Baalram smiled and stroked his beard. "That's different. What
amount of tuition had you in mind?"
 
Adiyaton (who, a quarter century hence, would have no precautionary need not
to call himself Pummairam) looked gleeful. Inwardly, he shivered, for he
gazed upon a man who must soon die.
 
 
 
From where the Patrol squadron waited, high in heaven, the storm was a
blue-black mountain range crouched on the northern horizon. Elsewhere the sea
reached argent and sapphire across the curve of the planet, save where
islands broke the sheen and, eastward, the Syrian coast made a darkling line.
Low in the west, the sun shone as cold as the blue around it. Wind whittered
in Everard's ears.
 
On the front saddle of his time hopper, he huddled into a parka. The rear
seat was empty, like those of about "half the two-score vehicles that shared
the sky with him. Their pilots hoped to transport prisoners. The rest were
guncraft, eggs of armor wherein fire waited to hatch. Light clanged off metal.
 
Damn! Everard thought. I'm freezing. How much longer? Has something gone
wrong? Did Pum betray himself to the enemy, or has his equipment failed, or
what?
 
A receiver dial secured to the steering bar beeped and winked red. Breath
exploded out of him, white vapor that the wind strewed and swallowed. Despite
his years as a hunter of men, he must gulp before he could snap into his
throat mike: "Signal received by commander. Triangulation stations, report."
 
Down ahead, in wrack and spindrift, the enemy band had appeared. They had
commenced their evil labors. But Pum had reached inside his garb and pressed
the button on a miniature radio transmitter.
 
Radio. The Exaltationists wouldn't anticipate something that primitive.
Everard hoped.
 
Now, Pum, boy, are you able to find shelter, protect yourself, the way you
were told to? Fear laid fingers around the Patrolman's gullet. He'd doubtless
begotten sons, here and there through the ages, but this was the closest he
had ever come to having one.
 
Words crackled in his earphones. Numbers followed. Instruments a hundred
miles apart had precisely found the beleaguered ship. Clocks had already
recorded the first split second of reception. "Okay," Everard said. "Compute
spatial coordinates for each vehicle according to our strategy. Troopers,
stand by for instructions."
 
That required several minutes. He felt a chilly peace welling up within him.
His unit was committed. At this exact moment, it was in battle yonder. Let
that happen which the Norns willed.
 
The data came crisply. "Everybody set?" he called. "Advance!"
 
He himself verniered controls and flipped the main drive toggle. His machine
sprang forward through space, backward through time, to the moment when Pum
had hailed it.
 
Wind raved. The hopper rocked and yawed in its antigrav field. Fifty yards
below, black in this gloom, waves roared. The spume blown off them was
sleet-colored. Everard saw by the light of a great torch some ways off. A
resinous mast, fanned by the storm, burned fiercely. Tarry, flaming pieces of
the ship were quenched in steam as it broke apart.
 
Everard tugged down his optical amplifiers. Vision became stark. It showed
him that his command had arrived correctly, so as to englobe the half-dozen
enemy vehicles everywhere above the billows.
 
It had not come soon enough to prevent them from starting their butchery.
They had done that on the instant of their own appearance. Not knowing where
any one of them would be, but knowing that each was lethally well-armed,
Everard had perforce caused his group to show up at a distance where it could
assess the situation before the killers noticed it.
 
They would, in a heartbeat or two. "Attack!" Everard roared needlessly. His
steed hurtled forward.
 
A blue-white hell-beam speared through murk. Zigzagging as he flew, he felt
it miss him by inches: heat, sting of ozone, crack of air. He didn't see it,
for his goggles had automatically stopped down a glare that would have
blinded.
 
Nor did he shoot back, though he drew his blaster. That wasn't his business.
Heaven was already lurid with such lightnings. The waters reflected them as
if also afire.
 
There was no good way to seize any enemy pilots. Everard's gunners had orders
to kill, at once, before the reavers realized how outnumbered they were and
skipped off into space-time. The job of the single-riding Patrolmen was to
capture those spies who had been aboard the ship.
 
He didn't expect he'd find them clinging to the sections of hull that swung
to and fro in the swells and disintegrated. Men would check those, of course,
just in case. But likeliest the travelers were afloat by themselves. They'd
surely taken the precaution of wearing cartridge-inflatable life jackets
under their contemporary kaftans.
 
Pum could not risk doing so. As a crewboy, he'd have looked wrong in much
more than a loincloth. It served to conceal his transmitter, but nothing
else. Everard had made certain he learned to swim.
 
Few Punic sailors could. Everard glimpsed one who gripped a plank. Almost, he
went to the rescue. But no, he mustn't. Baalram and his mariners had gone
under - except for Gisgo, whose survival revealed itself to be no accident.
The Patrol had pounced in time to save him from being hunted down as he
drifted; and he had the strength to keep hold of his heavy sweep till it
washed ashore. The rest, his shipmates, his friends - they died and their kin
mourned them, as would be the fate of seafarers for the next several thousand
years . . . and afterward spacefarers, timefarers....At least these men
perished so that their people, and untold billions of people in the future,
might live.
 
It was a bleak consolation.
 
Everard's reheightened vision brought him sight of another head,
unmistakable, yes, a man who bobbed about free as a cork - an enemy to take.
He swung low. The man looked up out of froth and turmoil. Malignancy wrenched
at his mouth. A hand rose from the water. It carried an energy pistol.
 
Everard was quicker to shoot. A thin beam stabbed. The man's scream was lost
in the gale. Likewise was his weapon. He gaped at seared flesh and naked bone
on that wrist.
 
Here Everard felt no pity. But he had not wanted to slay, in this encounter.
Live captives, under painless, harmless, absolute psychointerrogation, could
direct the Patrol to the lairs of all sorts of interesting villainies.
 
Everard lowered his vehicle. Its motor throbbed, holding it in place against
the waves that crashed over it, the wind that tore and hooted and chilled.
His legs clenched tight on the frame. He leaned from his saddle, got a hold
on the semiconscious man, lifted him and laid him across the bow. Okay, let's
get some altitude!
 
It was sheer chance, but not the less satisfying, that he, Manse Everard,
turned out to be the Patrol agent who clapped hands on Merau Varagan.
 
 
 
The squadron sought a quiet place, to make assessment before it went uptime.
Its choice was an uninhabited Aegean islet. White cliffs rose out of cerulean
waters, whose calm was stirred only by glitter of sunlight and foam. Gulls
flew equally lucent, and mewed through the lulling of the breeze. Shrubs
thrust forth among boulders. Warmth baked pungencies out of their leaves. Far
and far away, a sail passed by. It could have been driving the ship of
Odysseus.
 
The constables held conference. They had suffered no harm apart from a few
wounds. For those, analgesics and antishock medications were directly
available, and later hospital treatment would restore whatever had been lost.
They had shot down four Exaltationist vehicles; three got away, but would be
hunted, would be hunted. They had taken a full complement of captives.
 
One of the Patrolmen, homing on the transmitter, had plucked Pummairam from
the sea.
 
"Good show!" Everard bawled, and hugged the boy to him.
 
 
 
They sat on a bench at the Egyptian Harbor. It was as private a spot as any,
since everyone roundabout was too busy to eavesdrop; and soon the pulse of
Tyre would beat no more for either of them. They did draw stares. In honor of
the occasion, which had included various recreations around town, Everard had
bought them both kaftans of the finest linen and most beautiful dye, fit for
the kings they felt themselves to be. He didn't care about the clothing,
except that it would make duly impressive his farewell at Hiram's court, but
Pum was ecstatic.
 
The quay resounded - slap of feet, thud of hoofs, creak of wheels, rumble of
rolled barrels. A cargo was in from Ophir, by way of Sinai, and stevedores
were unloading its costly bales. Sweat beneath the sun made their muscled
bodies shine. Sailors lounged in a nearby lean-to tavern, where a girl danced
to music of flute and tabor; they drank, gambled, laughed, boasted, swapped
yarns of countries beyond and beyond. A vendor sang the praises of the
sweetmeats on his tray. A donkey cart passed laden. A priest of Melqart, in
gorgeous robes, talked with an austere foreigner who served Osiris. A couple
of red-haired Achaeans swaggered piratically by. A long-bearded warrior from
Jerusalem and a bodyguard for a visiting Philistine dignitary exchanged
glares, but the peace of Hiram stayed their swords. A black man in leopard
skin and ostrich plumes drew a swarm of Phoenician urchins. An Assyrian
walked weightily, holding his staff like a spear. An Anatolian and a blond
man from the North of Europe reeled arm in arm, beerful and cheerful. . . .
The air smelled of dyeworks, dung, smoke, tar, but also of sandal-wood,
myrrh, spice, and salt spray.
 
It would die at last, all of this, centuries hence, as everything must die;
but first, how mightily would it have lived! How rich would be its heritage!
 
"Yes," Everard said, "I don't want you to get above yourself -" He chuckled,
"- though are you ever below yourself? Still, Pum, you're a remarkable find.
We didn't simply rescue Tyre, we won you."
 
A trifle more hesitant than usual, the youngster stared before him. "You
explained that, lord, when teaching me. That hardly anybody in this age of
the world is able to imagine travel through time and the marvels of tomorrow.
It is no use to tell them, they merely get bewildered and frightened." He
cradled his downy chin. "Maybe I am different because I was always on my own,
never cast into a mold and let harden." Happily: "Then I praise the gods, or
whatever they were, that kicked me into such a life. It prepared me for a new
life with my master."
 
"Well, no, not really that," Everard replied. "We won't see each other often
again, you and I."
 
"What?" exclaimed Pum, stricken. "Why? Has your servant offended you, O my
lord?"
 
"Not in any way." Everard patted the thin shoulder beside him. "On the
contrary. But mine is a roving commission. What we want you for is an agent
in place, here in your home country, which you know in and out as a foreigner
like me - or Chaim and Yael Zorach - never can. Don't worry. It will be a
colorful task, and require as much of you as you can give."
 
Pum gusted a sigh. His smile flashed white. "Well, that will do, master! In
truth, I was a little daunted at the thought of faring always among aliens."
His tone dropped. "Will you ever come visit me?"
 
"Sure, once in a while. Or if you like, you can join me in assorted
interesting future locales when you take your furloughs. We Patrollers work
hard, and sometimes dangerously, but we have our fun." Everard paused, then
went on: "Of course, first you need training, education, every kind of
knowledge and skill you lack. You'll go to the Academy, elsewhere in space
and time. There you'll spend years, and they won't be easy years - though I
believe on the whole you'll revel in them. At last you'll return to this same
year in Tyre, aye, this same month, and take up your duties."
 
"I will be full-grown?"
 
"Right. In fact, they'll put quite a bit of height and weight on you, as well
as information into you. You'll need a new identity, but that won't be hard
to arrange. The same name will serve; it's common enough. You'll be Pummairam
the sailor, who shipped out years before as a youthful deckhand, won a
fortune in trade goods, and is ready to buy a ship and organize his own
ventures. You won't be especially conspicuous, that would defeat our purpose,
but you'll be a prosperous and well-regarded subject of King Hiram."
 
The boy clasped hands together. "Lord, your benevolence overwhelms his
servant."
 
"It isn't done with doing that," Everard answered. "I have discretionary
authority in a case like this, you know, and I am going to make certain
arrangements on your behalf. You can't pass for a respectable man when you
settle down unless you get married. Very well, you'll marry Sarai."
 
Pum squeaked. His gaze upon the Patrolman was dismayed.
 
Everard laughed. "Oh, come!" he said. "She may not be any beauty, but she's
not hideous either; we owe her much; and she's loyal, intelligent, versed in
the ways of the palace, lots of useful stuff. True, she'll never know who you
really are. She'll just be the wife of Captain Pummairam and mother of his
children. If any questions arise in her mind, I think she'll be too wise to
ask them." Sternly: "You will be good to her. Do you hear?"
 
"Well - ah, well - " Pum's attention strayed to the dancing girl. Phoenician
males lived by the double standard, and Tyre held more than its share of
joyhouses. "Yes, sir."
 
Everard slapped the other's knee. "I read your mind, son. However, you may
find you're not so interested in roaming. For a second wife, what would you
say to Bronwen?"
 
It was a pleasure to watch Pum being flabbergasted.
 
Everard grew serious. "Before leaving," he explained, "I mean to give Hiram a
gift, not the sort of present that's customary but something spectacular,
like a gold ingot. The Patrol has unlimited wealth and a relaxed attitude
toward requisitions. For the sake of his honor, Hiram can refuse me nothing
in his turn. I'll ask for his slave Bronwen and her children. When they are
mine, I'll formally manumit them and furnish her a dowry.
 
"I've sounded her out. If she can have freedom in Tyre, she doesn't really
want to go back to her homeland and share a wattle-and-daub hut with ten or
fifteen fellow tribesfolk. But to stay here, she must have a husband for
herself, a stepfather for her kids. How about you?"
 
"I - would I - might she -" The blood came and went through Pum's face.
 
Everard nodded. "I promised I'd find her a decent man."
 
She was wistful. Still, practicality takes precedence over romance in this
era, as it does in most. It may be hard on him later, seeing his family grow
old while he only fakes it. But what with his missions through time, he'll
have them for many decades of his life; and he's not brought up to the
American kind of sensitivity, after all. It should go reasonably well. No
doubt the women will become friends, and league to quietly rule Captain
Pummairam's roost for him.
 
"Then . . . oh, my lord!" The youth leaped to his feet and pranced.
 
"Easy, easy." Everard grinned. "On your calendar, remember, you've years to
go before you're established. Why delay? Seek the house of Zakar-baal and
report to the Zorachs. They'll get you started."
 
For my part. . . well, it'll take me a few days yet to wind up my stay at the
palace in graceful and plausible fashion. Meanwhile, Bronwen and I - Everard
sighed, with a wistfulness of his own.
 
Pum was gone. Feet flying, kaftan flapping, the purple wharf rat sped to the
destiny he would make for himself.
 
 
 
 
 
THE SORROW OF ODIN THE GOTH
 
 
 
"Then I heard a voice in the world: 'O woe
 
for the broken troth, And the heavy Need of the Niblungs, and
 
the Sorrow of Odin the Goth!' "
 
- William Morris, Sigurd the Volsung
 
 
 
372
 
 
 
Wind gusted out of twilight as the door opened. Fires burning down the length
of the hall flared in their trenches; flames wavered and streamed from stone
lamps; smoke roiled bitter back from the roof-holes that should have let it
out. The sudden brightness gleamed off spearheads, ax-heads, swordguards,
shield bosses, where weapons rested near the entry. Men, crowding the great
room, grew still and watchful, as did the women who had been bringing them
horns of ale. It was the gods carved on the pillars that seemed to move
amidst unrestful shadows, one-handed Father Tiwaz, Donar of the Ax, the Twin
Horsemen - they, and the beasts and heroes and entwining branches graven into
the wainscot. Whoo-oo said the wind, a noise as cold as itself.
 
Hathawulf and Solbern trod through. Their mother Ulrica strode between them,
and the look upon her face was no less terrible than the look on theirs. The
three of them halted for a heartbeat or two, a long time for those who
awaited their word. Then Solbern shut the door while Hathawulf stepped
forward and raised his right arm. Silence clamped down on the hall, save for
the crackling of fires and seething of breath.
 
Yet it was Alawin who spoke first. Rising from his bench, his slim frame
aquiver, he cried, "So we'll take revenge!" His voice cracked; he had but
fifteen winters.
 
The warrior beside him hauled at his sleeve and growled, "Sit. It is for the
lord to tell us." Alawin gulped, glared, obeyed.
 
A smile of sorts brought forth teeth in Hathawulf's yellow beard. He had been
in the world nine years longer than yon half-brother, four years more than
his full brother Solbern, but he seemed older, and not only because of
height, wide shoulders, wildcat gait; leadership had been his for the last
five of those years, after his father Tharasmund's death, and hastened the
growth of his soul. There were those who whispered that Ulrica kept too
strong a grip on him, but any who questioned his manhood would have had to
meet him in a fight and been unlikely to walk away from it.
 
"Yes," he said, without loudness, nevertheless heard from end to end of the
building. "Bring forth the wine, wenches; drink well, all my men, make love
to your wives, break out your war-gear; friends who have come hither offering
help, take my deepest thanks: for tomorrow dawn we ride to slay my sister's
murderer."
 
"Ermanaric," uttered Solbern. He was shorter and darker than Hathawulf, more
given to tending his farm and to shaping things with his hands than to war or
the chase; but he spat forth the name as if it had been a foulness in his
mouth.
 
A sigh, rather than a gasp, ran around the throng, though some of the women
shrank back, or moved closer to husbands, brothers, fathers, youths whom they
might have married someday. A few thanes growled, almost gladly, deep in
their throats. Grimness came upon others.
 
Among the latter was Liuderis, who had quelled Alawin. He stood up on his
bench, so as to be seen above heads. A stout, grizzled, scarred fellow,
formerly Tharasmund's trustiest man, he asked heavily: "You would fare
against the king, to whom you gave your oath?"
 
"That oath became worthless when he had Swanhild trodden beneath the hoofs of
horses," answered Hathawulf.
 
"Yet he says Randwar plotted his death."
 
"He says!" Ulrica shouted. She stalked forth until what light there was
flickered more fully across her: a big woman, her coiled braids half gray and
half still ruddy around a face whose lines had frozen into the sternness of
Weard herself. Costly furs trimmed Ulrica's cloak; the gown beneath was of
Eastland silk; amber from the Northlands glowed around her neck: for she was
the daughter of a king, who had married into the god-descended house of
Tharasmund.
 
She halted, fists clenched, and flung at Liuderis and the rest: "Well might
Randwar the Red have sought to overthrow Ermanaric. Too long have the Goths
suffered from that hound. Yes, I call him hound, Ermanaric, unfit to live.
Tell me not how he made us mighty and his sway reaches from the Baltic Sea to
the Black. It is his sway, not ours, and it will not outlast him. Tell
yourselves, rather, of scot well-nigh ruinous to pay, of wives and maidens
dishonored, of lands unrightfully seized and folk driven from their homes, of
men hewn down or burned in their surrounded dwellings merely because they
dared speak against his deeds. Remember how he slew his nephews and their
families when he did not get their treasure. Think how he had Randwar hanged,
on nothing more than the word of Sibicho Mann-frithsson - Sibicho, that viper
forever hissing in the king's ear. And ask yourselves this. Even if Randwar
had indeed become Ermanaric's foe, betrayed before he could strike to avenge
outrage upon his kin - even if this be so, why should Swanhild die too? She
was only his wife." Ulrica drew breath. "She was also the daughter of
Tharasmund and myself, the sister of your chief Hathawulf and of Solbern his
brother. They, who sprang from Wodan, shall send Ermanaric below to be her
slave."
 
"You talked to your sons alone for half a day, my lady," said Liuderis. "How
much of this is your will, not theirs?"
 
Hathawulf brought hand to sword. "You overspeak yourself," he snapped.
 
"I meant no ill -" the warrior began.
 
"The earth is tearful with the blood of Swanhild the fair," said Ulrica.
"Will it bear for us ever again, if we do not wash it with the blood of her
murderer?"
 
Solbern stayed more calm: "You Teurings know well how trouble has been waxing
for years between the king and our tribe. Why else did you rally to us when
you heard what happened? Do you not all think that belike this deed of his
was done to test our mettle? If we sit quietly at our hearths - if Heorot
takes whatever weregild he might deign to offer - he will know he is free to
crush us altogether."
 
Liuderis nodded, folded arms across breast, and answered steadily, "Well, you
shall not fare to battle without my sons and me, while this old head remains
above ground. I did but wonder if you and Hathawulf are being rash. Ermanaric
is strong indeed. Would it not be better if we bide our time, make quite
ready, gather men of neighbor tribes, before we strike?"
 
Hathawulf smiled afresh, a little more warmly than erstwhile. "We thought
about that," he said in a level tone. "If we give ourselves time, we give the
king time, too. Nor do I believe we can raise very many spears against him.
Not while the Huns prowl the marches, vassal folk are sullen about paying
tribute, and the Romans might see, in a war of Goth upon Goth, a chance to
enter and lay all beneath them. Besides, Ermanaric will not sit idle long
before he moves to humble the Teurings. No, we must attack now, before he
awaits us - catch him unawares, overwhelm his guardsmen - they do not much
outnumber you who are here - slay Ermanaric in one quick, clean blow, and
afterward call a folkmoot to pick a new king who shall be righteous."
 
Liuderis nodded again. "I have spoken my mind, you have spoken yours. Now let
us have an end of speaking. Tomorrow we ride." He sat down.
 
"It is a risk," Ulrica said. "These are my last living sons, and maybe they
fare to their deaths. That is as Weard wills, who sets the doom of gods and
men alike. But rather would I have my sons die boldly than kneel to their
sister's murderer. No luck would come of that."
 
Young Alawin leaped anew to his feet on the bench. His knife flashed forth.
"We won't die!" he shouted. "Ermanaric will, and Hathawulf will be king of
the Ostrogoths!"
 
A slow roar, like an incoming tide, lifted from the men.
 
Solbern the sober walked down the hall. The crowd made way for him. Strewn
rushes rustled and the clay floor thudded beneath his boots. "Did I hear you
say 'we'?" he asked through the rumbling. "No, you're a boy. You stay home."
 
The downy cheeks reddened. "I am man enough to fight for my house!" Alawin
shrilled.
 
Ulrica stiffened where she stood. Cruelty lashed from her: " 'Your' house,
by-blow?"
 
The growing din died away. Men traded uneasy stares. It did not bode well,
such an unleashing of olden hatred at such an hour as this. Alawin's mother
Erelieva had not merely been a leman of Tharasmund's, she had become the one
woman for whom he really cared, and Ulrica had gloated almost openly when
every child that Erelieva bore him, save for this firstborn, died small.
After the chieftain himself went down hell-road, friends of hers had gotten
her hastily married off to a yeoman who lived far from the hall. Alawin
stayed, the seemly thing for a lord's son to do, but Ulrica was always
stinging him.
 
Eyes clashed through smoke and shadow-haunted firelight. "Yes, my house,"
Alawin called, "and Swanhild m-m-my sister too." His stammer made him bite
his lip for shame.
 
"Easy, easy." Hathawulf raised his arm again. "You have the right, lad, and
do well to claim it. Yes, ride with us, come dawn." His glance defied Ulrica.
She twisted her mouth but said naught. Everybody guessed she was hoping the
stripling would be killed.
 
Hathawulf strode toward the high seat at the middle of the hall. His words
rang: "No more bickering! We'll be merry this eventide. But first, Anslaug -"
this to his wife - "come sit beside me, and together we'll drink the beaker
of Wodan."
 
Feet stamped, fists pounded wood, knives lifted like torches. The women
themselves began to yell with the men: "Hail, hail, hail!"
 
The door flew open.
 
Dusk had deepened fast, when autumn was on hand, so that the newcomer stood
in the middle of blackness. Wind flapped the edges of his blue cloak, flung a
few dead leaves in past him, whistled and chilled along the room. Folk turned
to see who had come, drew a sharp breath, and those who had been seated now
scrambled to stand. It was the Wanderer.
 
Tallest he stood among them, holding his spear more like a staff than a
weapon, as if he had no need of iron. A broad-brimmed hat shaded his face,
but not the wolf-gray hair and beard, nor the gleam of his gaze. Few of them
here had ever seen him before, most had never happened to be nigh when he
made his seldom showings; but none failed to know the forefather of the
Teuring headmen.
 
Ulrica was first to muster hardihood. "Greeting, Wanderer, and welcome," she
said. "You honor our roof. Come, take the high seat, and I will bring you a
horn of wine."
 
"No, a goblet, a Roman goblet, the best we have," said Solbern.
 
Hathawulf came back to the door, squared his shoulders, and stood before the
Elder. "You know what is afoot," he said. "What word have you for us?"
 
"This," answered the Wanderer. His voice was deep, and did not sound like the
southern Goths', or like any's whom they had met. Men supposed his mother
tongue was the tongue of the gods. Tonight it fell heavily, as if grief
weighted it. "You are bound upon vengeance, Hathawulf and Solbern, and that
stands not to be altered; it is the will of Weard. But Alawin shall not go
with you." The youth shrank back, whitening. A near sob broke harsh from his
throat.
 
The Wanderer's look ranged down the hall to lay hold upon him. "This is
needful," he went on, word by slow word. "I lay no slur on you when I say
that you are only half-grown, and would die bravely but uselessly. All who
are men have first been boys. No, I tell you instead that yours shall be
another task, more hard and strange than vengeance, for the welfare of that
kindred which sprang from your father's father's mother Jorith -" did his
tone waver the least bit? - "and myself. Abide, Alawin. Your time will come
soon enough."
 
"It . . . shall be done ... as you will," lord," said Hathawulf out of a
stiffened gullet. "But what does this mean . . . for those of us who ride
forth?"
 
The Wanderer regarded for him for a while that grew very still before
answering: "You do not wish to know. Be the word good or ill, you do not wish
to know."
 
Alawin sank to his bench, laid head in hands, and shuddered.
 
"Farewell," said the Wanderer. His cloak swirled, his spear swung about, the
door shut, he was gone.
 
 
 
1935
 
 
 
I didn't change clothes till my vehicle had brought me across space-time.
Then, in a Patrol base which masqueraded as a warehouse, I shed the garb of
the Dnieper basin, late fourth century, and donned that of the United States,
middle twentieth century.
 
The basic patterns, shirts and trousers for men, gowns for women, were the
same. Differences of detail were countless. Despite its coarse fabrics, the
Gothic outfit was more comfortable than a tie and jacket. I stowed it in the
baggage box of my hopper, along with such special items as the little gadget
I'd used to listen in, from outside, on the proceedings in the hall of the
Teuring sachem. Since my spear wouldn't fit, I left it strapped to the side
of the machine. I wouldn't be going anyplace on that except back to the
milieu where such weapons belonged.
 
The officer on duty today was in his early twenties - young by current
standards; in most eras he'd long since have been an established family man -
and somewhat in awe of me. True, my status as a member of the Time Patrol was
almost as much a technicality as his. I had no part in policing the
spatiotemporal lanes, rescuing travelers in distress, or anything glamorous
like that. I was merely a scientist of sorts; "scholar" was probably more
accurate. However, I did make trips on my own, which he was not qualified to
do.
 
He peered at me as I emerged from the hangar to the nondescript office,
allegedly of a construction company, which was our front in this town during
these years. "Welcome home, Mr. Harness," he said. "Uh, you had a pretty
rough go-around, didn't you?"
 
"What makes you think so?" I replied automatically.
 
"Your expression, sir. The way you walk."
 
"I was in no danger," I rapped. Not caring to talk about it, except to Laurie
and maybe not her either for a while, I brushed past him and stepped out onto
the street.
 
Here also it was fall, the kind of crisp and brilliant day New York often
enjoyed until it became uninhabitable; this year chanced to be the one before
I was born. Masonry and glass gleamed higher than high, up into a blueness
where a few bits of cloud scudded along on the breeze that gave me its cool
kiss. Cars were not so many that they put more than a tang into it, less than
the aroma of the roast chestnut carts that were beginning to come out of
estivation. I went over to Fifth Avenue and walked uptown past glamorous
shops, among some of the most beautiful women in the world, as well as people
from all the rich diversity of our planet.
 
My hope was that by going afoot to my place, I'd work out part of the tension
and misery in me. The city could not only stimulate, it could heal, right?
This was where Laurie and I had chosen to dwell, we who could have settled
practically anywhere in the past or the future.
 
No, of course that isn't quite correct. Like most couples, we wanted a nest
in reasonably familiar surroundings, where we didn't have to learn everything
from scratch and stay always on guard. The '30's were a marvelous milieu if
you were a white American, in good health and with money. What amenities were
lacking, such as air conditioning, could be unobtrusively installed, not to
be used when you had visitors who would never know that time travelers exist.
Granted, the Roosevelt gang was in charge, but the conversion of the Republic
to the Corporate State was not very far along as yet and didn't affect
Laurie's and my private lives; the outright disintegration of this society
wouldn't become a fast and obvious process till (my opinion) after the 1964
election.
 
In the Middle West, where my mother was now carrying me, we'd have had to be
annoyingly circumspect. But most New Yorkers were tolerant, or at least
incurious. A beard down to my chest, and shoulder-length hair which I'd
pulled into a queue while at the base, didn't draw many stares, nor more than
a few cries of "Beaver!" from little boys. To our landlord, our neighbors,
and other contemporaries, we were a retired professor of Germanic philology
and his wife, our oddities to be expected. It was no lie, either, as far as
it went. Therefore my walk should have eased me somewhat, restored that
perspective which Patrol agents must have, lest certain of the things they
witness drive them mad. We must understand that what Pascal said is true of
every human being in the whole of space-time, ourselves included: "The last
act is tragic, however pleasant all the comedy of the other acts. A little
earth on our heads, and all is done with forever." - understand it in our
bones, so that we can live with it calmly if not serenely. Why, those Goths
of mine were getting off lightly compared to, say, millions of European Jews
and Gypsies, less than ten years futureward, or millions of Russians at this
very moment.
 
It was no good. They were my Goths. Their ghosts crowded around me till
street, buildings, flesh and blood became the unreal, the half-remembered
dream.
 
Blindly, I hastened my steps, toward whatever sanctuary Laurie could give.
 
We occupied a huge flat overlooking Central Park, where we liked to stroll on
mild nights. The doorman at the apartment need not double as an armed guard.
I hurt him today by the curtness with which I returned his greeting, and
realized it when in the elevator, but then my regret was too late. To jump
back through time and change the incident would have violated the Prime
Directive of the Patrol. Not that something that trivial would have
threatened the continuum; it's flexible within limits, and the effects of
alterations usually damp out fast. Indeed, there's an interesting
metaphysical question about the extent to which time travelers discover the
past, versus the extent to which they create it. Schrodinger's cat lurks in
history as well as in its box. Yet the Patrol exists in order to assure that
temporal traffic does not abort that scheme of events which will at last
bring forth the Danellian superhu-mans who founded the Patrol when, in their
own remote past, ordinary men learned how to travel temporally.
 
My thoughts had fled into this familiar territory while I stood caged in the
elevator. It made the ghosts more distant, less clamorous. Nevertheless, when
I let myself into our home, they followed.
 
A smell of turpentine drifted amidst the books which lined the living room.
Laurie was winning somewhat of a name as a painter, here in the 1930's when
she was no longer the preoccupied faculty wife she had been later in our
century. Offered a job in the Patrol, she had declined; she lacked the
physical strength that a field agent - male or, especially, female - was
bound to need upon occasion, while routine clerical or reference work didn't
interest her. To be sure, we'd shared vacations in mighty exotic milieus.
 
She heard me enter and ran from her studio to meet me. The sight lifted my
spirits a tiny bit. In spattered smock, red hair tucked under a kerchief, she
was still slender, supple, and handsome. The lines around her green eyes were
too fine to notice until she got near enough to embrace me.
 
Our local acquaintances tended to envy me a wife who, besides being
delightful, was far younger than myself. In fact, the difference in
birthdates is a mere six years. I was in my mid-forties, and prematurely
gray, when the Patrol recruited me, whereas she had kept most of her youthful
looks. The antithanatic treatment that our organization provides will arrest
the aging process but not reverse its effects.
 
Besides, she spent most of her life in ordinary time, sixty seconds to the
minute. As a field agent, I'd go through days, weeks, or months between
saying goodbye to her in the morning and returning for dinner -an interlude
during which she could pursue her career without me underfoot. My cumulative
age was approaching a hundred years.
 
Sometimes it felt like a thousand. That showed.
 
"Hi, there, Carl, darling!" Her lips pulsed against mine. I drew her close.
If a dab of paint got onto my suit, what the hell? Then she stepped back,
took both my hands, and sent her gaze across me and into me.
 
Her voice dropped low: "It's hurt you, this trip."
 
"I knew it would," I answered out of my weariness.
 
"But you didn't know how much. . . . Were you gone long?"
 
"No. Tell you about it in a while, the details. I was lucky, though. Hit a
key point, did what I needed to do, and got out again. A few hours of
observation from concealment, a few minutes of action, and fini."
 
"I suppose you might call it luck. Must you return soon?"
 
"In that era, yes, quite soon. But I want a while here to - to rest, get over
what I saw was about to happen. . . . Can you stand me around, brooding at
you, for a week or two?"
 
"Sweetheart." She came back to me.
 
"I have to work up my notes anyway," I said into her ear, "but evenings we
can go out to dinner, the theater, have fun together."
 
"Oh, I hope you'll be able to have fun. Don't pretend for my sake."
 
"Later, things will be easier," I assured us. "I'll simply be carrying out my
original mission, recording the stories and songs they'll make about this.
It's just. . . I've got to get through the reality first."
 
"Must you?"
 
"Yes. Not for scholarly purposes, no, I guess not. But those are my people.
They are."
 
She hugged me tighter. She knew.
 
What she did not know, I thought in an uprush of pain - what I hoped to God
she did not know - was why I cared so greatly about yonder descendants of
mine. Laurie wasn't jealous. She'd never begrudged the while that Jorith and
I had had. Laughing, she'd said it deprived her of nothing, while it gave me
a position in the community I was studying which might well be unique in the
annals of my profession. Afterward she'd done her best to console me.
 
What I could not bring myself to tell her was that Jorith was not simply a
close friend who happened to be a woman. I could not say to her that I had
loved one who lay dust these sixteen hundred years as much as I loved her,
and still did, and maybe always would.
 
 
 
300
 
 
 
The home of Winnithar the Wisentslayer stood on a bluff above the River
Vistula. It was a thorp, half a dozen houses clustered around a hall, with
barns, sheds, cookhouse, smithy, brewery, and other workplaces nearby: for
his family had long dwelt here, and waxed great among the Teurings. Westward
reached meadows and croplands. Eastward, across the water, wilderness
remained, though settlement was encroaching heavily upon it as the tribe grew
in numbers.
 
They might have logged off the woods altogether, save that more and more of
them were moving away. This was a time of unrest. Not only were plundering
warbands on the trail; whole folk were pulling up stakes, and clashing when
they met. Word drifted from afar that the Romans were often at each other's
throats too, while the mightiness which their forefathers had built crumbled.
As yet, few Northerners had done anything bolder than to raid along the
Imperial borders. But the southlands just outside those borders, warm, rich,
scantily defended by their dwellers, beckoned many a Goth to come carve out a
new home for himself.
 
Winnithar stayed where he was. However, that forced him to pass almost as
much of each year in fighting - especially against Vandals, though sometimes
against Gothic tribes, Greutungs or Taifals - as he passed in farming. As his
sons neared manhood, they began to yearn elsewhere.
 
Thus matters stood when Carl arrived.
 
He came in winter, when hardly anybody traveled. On that account, men made
strangers doubly welcome, who broke the sameness of their lives.
 
At first, spying him at a mile's reach, they took him for a mere gangrel,
since he fared alone and afoot. Nonetheless they knew their chief would want
to see him.
 
He drew nigh, striding easily over the frozen ruts of the road, making a
staff of his spear. His blue cloak was the only color in that landscape of
snow-decked fields, stark trees, dull sky. Hounds bayed and growled at him;
he showed no fear, and afterward the men came to understand that he could
have stricken those dead that attacked him. Today they called the beasts to
heel and met the newcomer with sudden respect - for it became plain that his
garments were of the finest, and not the least way-stained, while he himself
was awesome. Taller than the tallest here he loomed, lean but sinewy, a
graybeard as lithe as a youth. What had those pale eyes of his beheld?
 
A warrior went ahead to greet him. "I hight Carl," he said when asked:
nothing further. "Fain would I guest you a while." The Gothic words came
readily from him, but their sound, and sometimes their order or endings, were
not of any dialect known to the Teurings.
 
Winnithar had stayed in his hall. It would have been unseemly for him to gape
like an underling. When Carl entered, Winnithar said from his high seat, "Be
welcome if you come in peace and honesty. May Father Tiwaz ward you and
Mother Frija bless you." - as was the ancient custom of his house.
 
"My thanks," Carl answered. "That was kindly spoken to a fellow you may well
think is a beggar. I am not, and hope this gift will be found worthy." He
reached in the pouch at his belt and drew forth an arm-ring which he handed
over to Winni-thar. Gasps arose from those who had jostled close to watch,
for the ring was heavy, of pure gold, cunningly wrought and set with gems.
 
The host kept his calmness, barely. "That is a gift a king might have given.
Share my seat, Carl." It was the place of honor. "Abide for as long as you
wish." He clapped his hands. "Ho," he shouted, "bring mead for our guest, and
for me that I may drink his health!" To the swains, wenches, and children
milling about: "Back to your work, you. We can all hear whatever he chooses
to tell us after the evening meal. Now he's doubtless weary."
 
Grumblingly, they heeded. "Why say you that?" Carl asked him.
 
"The nearest dwelling where you might have spent last night is a goodly walk
from this," Winnithar replied.
 
"I was at none," Carl said.
 
"What?"
 
"You would be bound to find that out. I would not have you believe I lied to
you."
 
"But - " Winnithar peered at him, tugged his mustache, and said slowly: "You
are not of these parts; aye, you must have fared far. Yet your garb is clean,
though you carry no change of clothes, nor food or aught else that a traveler
should. Who are you, whence have you come, and . . . how?"
 
Carl's tone was mild, but those who listened heard what steel underlay it.
"There are things I may not talk about. I do give you my oath - may Donar's
lightning smite me if it is false - that I am no outlaw, nor foe to your
kindred, nor a sort whom it would shame you to have beneath your roof."
 
"If honor demands that you keep certain secrets, none shall pry," said
Winnithar. "But you understand that we cannot help wondering - " Clear to see
was the relief with which he broke off and exclaimed: "Ah, here comes the
mead. That's my wife Salvalindis who bears your horn to you, as befits a
guest of rank."
 
Carl hailed her courteously, though his gaze kept straying to the maiden at
her side, who brought Winnithar his draught. She was sweetly formed and moved
like a deer; unbound hair streamed golden past a face with fine bones, shyly
smiling lips, eyes big and the hue of summer heaven.
 
Salvalindis noticed. "You meet our oldest child," she told Carl, "our
daughter Jorith."
 
 
 
1980
 
 
 
After basic training at the Patrol Academy, I returned to Laurie on the same
day as I'd left her. I'd need a spell to rest and readapt; it was rather a
shock transferring from the Oligocene period to a Pennsylvania college town.
We must also set our mundane affairs in order. For my part, I should finish
out the academic year before resigning "to take a better-paying job abroad."
Laurie saw to the sale of our house and the disposal of goods we didn't want
to keep - wherever and whenever else we were going to establish residence.
 
It wrenched us, bidding goodbye to the friends of years. We promised to make
occasionalvisits, but knew that those would be few and far between, until
they ceased entirely. The required lies were too great a strain. As was, we
left an impression that my vaguely described new position was a cover for a
post in the CIA.
 
Well, I had been warned at the beginning that a Time Patrol agent's life
becomes a series of farewells. I had yet to learn what that really meant.
 
We were still in the course of uprooting ourselves when I got a phone call.
"Professor Farness? This is Manse Everard, Unattached operative. I wonder if
we could meet for a talk, like maybe this weekend."
 
My heart bounded. Unattached is about as high as you can get in the
organization; throughout the million or more years that it guards, such
personnel are rare. Normally a member, even if a police officer, works within
a single milieu, so that he or she can get to know it inside out, and as part
of a closely coordinated team. The Unattached may go anyplace they choose and
do virtually anything they see fit, responsible only to their consciences,
their peers, and the Danellians. "Uh, sure, certainly, sir," I blurted.
"Saturday would be fine. Do you want to come here? I guarantee you a good
dinner."
 
"Thanks, but I'd prefer it was my digs - the first time, anyway. Got my files
and computer terminal and things like that handy. Just the two of us, please.
Don't worry about airline schedules. Find a spot, as it might be your
basement, where nobody will see. You've been issued a locator, haven't you? .
. . Okay, read off the coordinates and call me back. I'll pick you up on my
hopper."
 
I found out later that that was characteristic of him. Large, tough-looking,
wielding more power than Caesar or Genghis ever dreamed of, he was as
comfortable as an old shoe.
 
Me on the saddle behind his, we skipped through space, rather than time, to
the current Patrol base in New York City. From there we walked to the
apartment he maintained. He didn't like dirt, disorder, and danger any better
than I did. However, he felt he needed a pied-a-terre in the twentieth
century, and had grown used to these lodgings before decay had advanced
overly far.
 
"I was born in your state in 1924," he explained. "Entered the Patrol at age
thirty. That's why I decided I should be the guy who interviewed you. We have
pretty much the same background; we ought to understand each other."
 
I took a steadying gulp of the whisky and soda he'd poured for us and said
cautiously, "I'm not too sure, sir. Heard something about you at the school.
Seems you led quite an adventurous life even before you joined. And afterward
- Me, I've been a quiet, stick-in-the-mud type."
 
"Not really." Everard glanced at a sheet of notes he held. His left hand
curled around a battered briar pipe. Once in a while he'd take a puff or a
sip. "Let's refresh my memory, shall we? You didn't see combat during your
Army hitch, but that was because you served your two years in what we
laughingly call peacetime. You did, though, make top scores on the target
range. You've always been an outdoorsman, mountaineering, skiing, sailing,
swimming. In college, you played football and won your letter in spite of
that lanky build. In grad school your hobbies included fencing and archery.
You've traveled a fair amount, not always to the safe and standard places.
Yes, I'd call you adventurous enough for our purposes. Possibly a tad too
adventurous. That's one thing I'm trying to sound you out about."
 
Feeling awkward, I glanced again around the room. On a high floor, it was an
oasis of quiet and cleanliness. Bookshelves lined the walls, save for three
excellent pictures and a pair of Bronze Age spears. Else the only obvious
souvenir was a polar bear rug that he had remarked was from tenth-century
Greenland.
 
"You've been married twenty-three years, to the same lady," Everard remarked.
"These days, that indicates a stable character."
 
There was no sign of femininity here. To be sure, he might well keep a wife,
or wives, elsewhen. "No children," Everard went on. "Hm, none of my business,
but you do know, don't you, that if you want, our medics can repair every
cause of infertility this side of menopause? They can compensate for a late
start on pregnancies, too."
 
"Thanks," I said. "Fallopian tubes - Yes, Laurie and I have discussed it. We
may well take advantage someday. But we don't think we'd be wise to begin
parenthood and my new career simultaneously." I formed a chuckle. "If
simultaneity means anything to a Patroller."
 
"A responsible attitude. I like that." Everard nodded.
 
"Why this review, sir?" I ventured. "I wasn't invited to enlist merely on the
strength of Herbert Ganz's recommendation. Your -people put me through a
whole battery of far-future psych tests before they told me what it meant."
 
They'd called it a set of scientific experiments. I'd cooperated because Ganz
had asked me to, as a favor to a friend of his. It wasn't his field; he was
in Germanic languages and literature, the same as me. We'd met at a
professional gathering, become drinking buddies, and corresponded quite a
bit. He'd admired my papers on Deor and Widsith, I'd admired his on the
Gothic Bible.
 
Naturally, I did not know then that it was his. It was published in Berlin in
1853. Later he was recruited into the Patrol, and eventually he came uptime
under an alias, in search of fresh talent for his undertaking.
 
Everard leaned back. Across the pipe, his gaze probed at me. "Well," he said,
"the machines told us you and your wife are trustworthy, and would both be
delighted by the truth. What they could not measure was how competent you'd
be in the job for which you were proposed. Excuse me, no insult intended.
Nobody is good at everything, and these missions will be tough, lonesome,
delicate." He paused. "Yes, delicate. The Goths may be barbarians, but that
doesn't mean they are stupid, or that they can't be hurt as badly as you or
me."
 
"I understand," I said. "But look, all you need do is read the reports I'll
have filed in my own personal future. If the early accounts show me bungling,
why, just tell me to stay home and become a book researcher. The outfit needs
those too, doesn't it?"
 
Everard sighed. "I have inquired, and been told you performed - will perform
- will have performed - satisfactorily. That isn't enough. You don't realize,
because you haven't experienced it, how overburdened the Patrol is, how
ghastly thin we're spread across history. We can't examine every detail of
what a field agent does. That's especially true when he or she isn't a cop
like me, but a scientist like you, exploring a milieu poorly chronicled or
not chronicled at all." He treated himself to a swallow of his drink. "That's
why the Patrol does have a scientific branch. So it can get a slightly better
idea of what the hell the events are that it is supposed to keep careless
time travelers from changing."
 
"Would it make a significant difference, in a situation as obscure as that?"
 
"It might. In due course, the Goths play an important role, don't they? Who
knows what a happening early on - a victory or a defeat, a rescue or a death,
a certain individual getting born or not getting born - who knows what effect
that could have, as its results propagate through the generations?"
 
"But I'm not even concerned with real events, except indirectly," I argued.
"My objective is to help recover various lost stories and poems, and unravel
how they evolved and how they influenced later works."
 
Everard grinned ruefully. "Yeah, I know. Ganz's big deal. The Patrol has
bought it because it is an opening wedge, the single such wedge we've found,
to getting the history of that milieu recorded."
 
He knocked back his drink and rose. "How about another?" he proposed. "And
then we'll have lunch. Meanwhile, I wish you'd tell me exactly what your
project is."
 
"Why, you must have talked to Herbert - to Professor Ganz," I said,
astonished. "Uh, thanks, I would like a refill."
 
"Sure," Everard said, pouring. "Retrieve Germanic literature of the Dark
Ages. If 'literature' is the right word for stuff that was originally word of
mouth, in illiterate societies. Mere chunks of it have survived on paper, and
scholars don't agree on how badly garbled those copies are. Ganz's working on
the, um-m, the Nibelung epic. What I'm vague about is where you fit in.
That's a story from the Rhineland. You want to go gallivanting solo away off
in eastern Europe, in the fourth century."
 
His manner did more than his whisky to put me at ease. "I hope to track down
the Ermanaric part," I told him. "It isn't properly integral, but a
connection did develop, and besides, it's interesting in its own right."
 
"Ermanaric? Who dat?" Everard gave me my glass and settled himself to listen.
 
"Maybe I better backtrack a little," I said. "How familiar are you with the
Nibelung-Volsung cycle?"
 
"Well, I've seen Wagner's Ring operas. And when I had a mission once in
Scandinavia, toward the close of the Viking period, I heard a yarn about
Sigurd, who killed the dragon and woke the Valkyrie and afterward mucked
everything up."
 
"That's a fraction of the whole story, sir."
 
" 'Manse' will do, Carl."
 
"Oh, uh, thanks. I feel honored." Not to grow fulsome, I hurried on in my
best classroom style:
 
"The Icelandic Volsungasaga was written down later than the German
Nibelungenlied, but contains an older, more primitive, and lengthier version
of the story. The Elder and the Younger Edda have some of it too. Those are
the sources that Wagner mainly borrowed from.
 
"You may recall that Sigurd the Volsung got tricked into marrying Gudrun the
Gjuking instead of Brynhild the Valkyrie, and this led to jealousy between
the women and at last to his getting killed. In German, those persons are
called Siegfried, Kriemhild of Burgundy, Brunhild of Isenstein; and the pagan
gods don't appear; but no matter now. According to both stories, Gudrun, or
Kriemhild, later married a king called Atli, or Etzel, who is none other than
Attila the Hun.
 
"Then the versions really diverge. In the Nibelun-genlied, Kriemhild lures
her brothers to Etzel's court and has them set on and destroyed, as her
revenge for their murder of Siegfried. Theodoric the Great, the Ostrogoth who
took over Italy, gets into that episode under the name of Dietrich of Bern,
though in historical fact he flourished a generation later than Attila. A
follower of his, Hildebrand, is so horrified at Kriemhild's treachery and
cruelty that he slays her. Hildebrand, by the way, has a legend of his own,
in a ballad whose entirety Herb Ganz wants to find, as well as in derivative
works. You see what a cat's cradle of anachronisms this is."
 
"Attila the Hun, eh?" Everard murmured. "Not a very nice man. But he operated
in the middle fifth century, when those bully boys were already riding high
in Europe. You're going to the fourth." "Correct. Let me give you the
Icelandic tale. Atli enticed Gudrun's brothers to him because he wanted the
Rhinegold. She tried to warn them, but they came anyway under pledge of safe
conduct. When they wouldn't surrender the hoard or tell Atli where it was, he
had them put to death. Gudrun got even for that. She butchered the sons she'd
borne him and served them to him as ordinary food. Later she stabbed him as
he slept, set his hall afire, and left Hunland. With her she took Svanhild,
her daughter by Sigurd."
 
Everard frowned, concentrating. It couldn't be easy to keep track of these
characters.
 
"Gudrun came to the country of the Goths," I said. "There she married again
and had two sons, Hamther and Sorli. The king of the Goths is called
Jormunrek in the saga and in the Eddie poems, but there is no doubt that he
was Ermanaric, who is a real if shadowy figure around the middle and late
fourth century. Accounts differ whether he married Svanhild and she was
falsely accused of infidelity, or she married somebody else whom the king
caught plotting against him and hanged. In either case, he had poor Svanhild
trampled to death by horses.
 
"By this time, Gudrun's boys, Hamther and Sorli, were young men. She egged
them on to kill Jormunrek in vengeance for Svanhild. Along the way they met
their half-brother Erp, who offered to accompany them. They cut him down. The
manuscripts are vague as to the reason why. My guess is he was their father's
child by a concubine and there was bad blood between them and him.
 
"They proceeded to Jormunrek's headquarters and the attack. They were two
alone, but invulnerable to steel, so they slew men right and left, reached
the king, and wounded him severely. Before they could finish the job, though,
Hamther let slip that stones could hurt them. Or, according to the saga, Odin
suddenly appeared, in the guise of an old man with one eye, and betrayed this
information. Jormunrek called to his remaining warriors to stone the
brothers, and that is how they died. There the tale ends."
 
"Grim, hey?" said Everard. He pondered for a minute. "But it seems to me that
whole last episode- Gudrun in Gothland - must've been tacked on at a much
later date. The anachronisms have gotten completely out of hand."
 
"Of course," I agreed. "That very commonly happens in folklore. An important
story will attract lesser ones to it. Even in trifling ways. For instance, it
wasn't W. C. Fields who said that a man who hates children and dogs can't be
all bad. It was somebody else, I forget who, introducing Fields at a banquet."
 
Everard laughed. "Don't tell me the Patrol should monitor Hollywood history!"
He grew serious again. "If that sanguinary little yarn doesn't really belong
in the Nibelung canon, why do you want to trace it? Why does Ganz want you
to?"
 
"Well, it did reach Scandinavia, where it did inspire a couple of pretty good
poems - if those weren't just redactions of something earlier - and did hook
up to the Volsung saga. The connections, the whole evolution, interest us.
Also, Ermanaric gets mention elsewhere - in certain Old English lays, for
instance. So he must have figured in a lot of legend and bardic work that was
since forgotten. He was powerful in his day, though apparently not a very
nice man himself. The lost Ermanaric cycle might well be as important and
brilliant as anything that has come down to us from the West and the North.
It may have influenced Germanic literature in scores of unsuspected ways."
 
"Do you intend to go straight to his court? I wouldn't recommend that, Carl.
Too many field agents get killed because they got careless."
 
"Oh, no. Something horrible happened, from which stories sprang and traveled
far, even reaching into historical chronicles. I think I can bracket when it
happened, too, within about ten years. But I mean to familiarize myself
thoroughly with the whole milieu before I venture into that episode."
 
"Good. What is your plan?"
 
"I'll take an electronic cram in the Gothic language. I can read it already,
but want to speak it fluently, though doubtless my accent will be odd. I'll
also want a cram on what little is known about customs, beliefs, et cetera.
That'll be very little. The Ostrogoths, if not the Visigoths, were still on
the bare fringes of Roman awareness. Surely they changed considerably before
they moved west.
 
"So I'll begin well downtime of my target dates; somewhat arbitrarily, I'm
thinking of 300 AD. I'll get acquainted with people. Next I'll reappear at
intervals and learn what's been going on in my absence. In short, I'll keep
track of events as they march toward the event. When it finally comes, I
shouldn't be caught by surprise. Afterward I'll drop in here and there, from
time to time, and listen to the poets and storytellers, and get their words
on a concealed recorder."
 
Everard scowled. "Um-m, that kind of procedure - Well, we can discuss the
possible complications. You'll move around a fair amount geographically too,
won't you?"
 
"Yes. According to what traditions of theirs got written down in the Roman
Empire, the Goths originated in what's now central Sweden. I don't believe
that numerous a breed could have come from that limited an area, even
allowing for natural increase, but it may have furnished leaders and
organization, the way the Scandinavians did for the nascent Russian state in
the ninth century.
 
"I'd say the bulk of the Goths started as dwellers
 
along the southern Baltic littoral. They were the easternmost of the Germanic
peoples. Not that they were ever a single nation. By the time they reached
western Europe, they were separated into the Ostrogoths, who took over Italy,
and the Visigoths, who took over Iberia. Gave those regions fairly good
government, by the way, the best government they'd had for a long while.
Eventually the invaders were overrun in their turn, and vanished into the
general populations." "But earlier?"
 
"Historians make unclear mention of tribes. By 300 AD, Goths were firmly
established along the Vistula, in the middle of what's currently Poland.
Before the end of that century, the Ostrogoths were in the Ukraine and the
Visigoths just north of the Danube, the Roman frontier. A great folk
migration, apparently, over the course of generations, because they seem at
last to have abandoned the North entirely; there, Slavic tribes moved in.
Ermanaric was an Ostrogoth, so that's the branch I mean to follow."
 
"Ambitious," Everard said doubtfully. "And you a new chum."
 
"I'll gain experience as I go along, uh, Manse. You admitted yourself, the
Patrol is shorthanded. Moreover, I'll be acquiring a lot of that history
which you want."
 
He smiled. "You should, at that." Rising: "Come on, finish your drink and
let's go eat. We'll need a change of clothes, but it'll be worth the trouble.
I know a local saloon, back in the 1890's, that sets out a magnificent free
lunch."
 
 
 
300-302
 
 
 
Winter descended and then slowly, in surges of wind, snow, icy rain, drew
back. For those who dwelt in the thorp by the river, and soon for their
neighbors, the dreariness of the season was lightened that year. Carl abode
among them.
 
At first the mystery surrounding him roused fear in many; but they came to
see that he bore neither ill will nor bad luck. The awe of him did not
dwindle. Rather, it grew. From the beginning, Winnithar said that for such a
guest to sleep on a bench, like a common thane, was unfitting, and turned a
shut-bed over to him. He offered Carl the pick of the thrall women to warm
it, but the stranger made refusal, in mannerly wise. He did accept food and
drink, and he did bathe and seek the outhouse. However, the whisper went
about that maybe these things were not needful for him, save as a show of
being mortal.
 
Carl was soft-spoken and friendly, in a somewhat lofty way. He could laugh,
crack a joke, tell a funny tale. He went forth afoot or ahorse, in company,
to hunt or call on the nearer yeomen or join in offerings to the Anses and in
the feasting that followed. He took part in contests such as shooting or
wrestling, until it had become clear that no man could best him. When he
played at knucklebones or board games, he did not always win, though the idea
arose that this was because he chose not to make folk afraid of witchcraft.
He would talk to anybody, from Winnithar to the lowliest thrall or littlest
toddler, and listen with care; indeed, he drew them out, and was kindly
toward underlings and animals.
 
But as for his own inward self, that remained hidden.
 
This did not mean that he sat sullen. No, he made words and music come forth
asparkle as none had ever done before. Eager to hear songs, lays, stories,
saws, everything that went about, he gave overflowing measure in return. For
he seemed to know all the world, as if he had wandered it himself for longer
than a lifetime.
 
He told of Rome, the mighty and troubled, of rts lord Diocletian, his wars
and his stern laws. He answered questions about the new god, him of the
Cross, of whom the Goths had heard a bit from traders or from slaves sold
this far north. He told of the Romans' great foes, the Persians, and what
wonders they had wrought. Onward his words ranged, evening after evening - on
southward to lands where it was always hot, and people had black skins, and
beasts prowled that were akin to lynxes but the size of bears. Other beasts
did he show them, drawing pictures in charcoal on slabs of wood, and they
cried aloud in their astonishment; set beside an elephant, an aurochs or even
a troll-steed was nothing! Near the ends of the East, he said, lay a realm
larger, older, more marvelous than Rome or Persia. Its dwellers were of a hue
like wan amber, and had eyes that appeared to be aslant. Plagued by wild
tribes north of them, they had built a wall as long as a mountain range, and
had since then been striking back out of that redoubt. This was why the Huns
had come west. They, who had broken the Alans and were vexing the Goths, were
only a rabble in the slanting gaze of Khitai. And all this vastness was not
all there was. If you traveled westward till you had crossed the Roman
holding called Gaul, you would come to the World Sea of which you had heard
fables, and if there you took ship - but craft such as plied the rivers were
not big enough - and sailed on and on, you would find the home of the wise
and wealthy Mayas. . . .
 
Tales Carl also had of men, women, and their deeds - Samson the strong,
Deirdre the fair and unhappy, Crockett the hunter. . . .
 
Jorith, daughter of Winnithar, forgot she was of age to be wedded. She would
sit among the children on the floor, at Carl's feet, and hearken while her
eyes caught firelight and became suns.
 
He was not steadily on hand. Often he would say he must be by himself, and
stride off out of sight. Once a lad, brash but skilled at stalking, followed
him unseen, unless it was that Carl deigned not to heed him. The boy came
back white and ashudder, to stammer forth that the graybeard had gone into
Tiwaz's Shaw. None went under those darkling pines save on Midwinter Eve,
when three blood offerings - horse, hound, and slave - were made so that the
Binder of the Wolf would bid darkness and cold begone. The boy's father
flogged him, and thereafter nobody spoke openly of it. If the gods allowed it
to happen, best not ask into their reasons.
 
Carl would return in a few days, freshly clothed and bearing gifts. Those
were small things, but beyond price, be it a knife whose steel held an edge
uncommonly long, a scarf of lustrous foreign fabric, a mirror outdoing buffed
brass or a still pond - the treasures arrived and arrived, until everybody of
any standing, man or woman, had gotten at least one. About this he said
merely, "I know the makers."
 
Spring stole northward, snow melted, buds burst into leaf and flower, the
river brawled in spate. Homebound birds filled heaven with wings and clamor.
Lambs, calves, foals tottered across paddocks. Folk came forth, blinking in
sudden brightness; they aired out their houses, garments, and souls. The
Spring Queen drove Frija's image from farm to farm to bless the plowing and
sowing, while garlanded youths and maidens danced around her oxcart. Longings
quickened.
 
Carl went away still, but now he would be back on the same evening. More and
more were he and Jorith together. They would even stroll into woods, down
blossoming lanes, over meadows, out of everybody else's ken. She walked as
though lost in dreams. Salvalindis her mother scolded her about unseemliness
- did she care naught for her good name? - until Winnithar quelled his wife.
The chieftain was a shrewd reckoner. As for Jorith's brothers, they glowed.
 
At length Salvalindis took her daughter aside. They sought an outbuilding
where the household's women met to weave and sew when there was no other work
for them. There was now, so that these two were alone in its dimness.
Salvalindis put Jorith between herself and the broad, stone-weighted loom, as
if to trap her, and asked bluntly, "Have you been less idle with that man
Carl than you've become at home? Has he had you?"
 
The maiden flushed, twisted fingers together, stared downward. "No," she
breathed. "He can, whenever he wants. How I wish he would. But we've only
held hands, kissed a little, and - and -"
 
"And what?"
 
"Talked. Sung songs. Laughed. Been grave. Oh, mother, he's not aloof. With
me, he's kinder and, and sweeter than . . . than I knew a man could be. He
talks to me as he would to somebody who can think, not just be a wife -"
 
Salvalindis' lips pinched. "I never stopped thinking when I married. Your
father may see a powerful ally in Carl. But I see in him a man without land
or kin, belike a warlock but rootless, rootless. What gain can our house have
of linking with him? Goods, aye; knowledge; but what use are those when
foemen threaten? What would he leave to his sons? What would bind him to you
after the freshness is gone? Girl, you're being a fool."
 
Jorith clenched her fists, stamped her foot, and yelled through tears that
were more of rage than woe: "Hold your tongue, old crone!" At once she shrank
back, as aghast as Salvalindis.
 
"You speak thus to your mother?" the latter said. "Aye, a warlock he is,
who's cast a spell on you. Throw that brooch he gave you into the river, do
you hear?" She turned and left the room. Her skirts made an angry rustling.
 
Jorith wept, but did not obey.
 
And soon everything changed.
 
On a day when rain blew like spears, while Donar's wagon boomed aloft and the
flash of his ax blinded heaven, a man galloped into the thorp. He sagged in
the saddle, and his horse was near falling from weariness. Nevertheless he
shook an arrow on high and shrilled to those who had come out through the mud
to meet him: "War! The Vandals draw nigh!"
 
Brought into the hall, he said before Winnithar: "My word is from my father,
Aefli of Staghorn Dale. He had it from a man of Dagalaif Nevittas-son, who
fled the slaughter at Elkford so as to carry warning. But already we at
Aefli's had marked a ruddiness on the skyline, where surely farmsteads were
afire."
 
"Two bands of them, then," Winnithar muttered. "At least. Belike more.
They're out early this year, and in strength."
 
"How could they leave their grounds untended in seeding time?" asked a son of
his.
 
Winnithar gusted a sigh. "They've bred more hands than they need for work.
Besides, I hear of a King Hildaric, who's brought their clans beneath him.
Thus they can field greater hosts than erstwhile, which move faster and under
a better plan than we're able. Aye, could be Hildaric means to rid these
lands of us, for the good of his own overflowing realm."
 
"What shall we do?" an iron-steady old warrior wanted to know.
 
"Gather the neighborhood men and go to meet as many others as time allows,
like Aefli's, if he hasn't already been overrun. At the Rock of the Twin
Horsemen as aforetime, eh? It may be that, together, we'll not hit a Vandal
troop too big for us."
 
Carl stirred where he sat. "But what of your homes?" he asked. "Raiders could
outflank you, unbeknownst, and fall on steadings like yours." He left the
rest unspoken: plunder, burning, women in their best years borne off,
everybody else cut down.
 
"We must risk that. Else we'll be whipped piecemeal." Winnithar grew silent.
The longfires leaped and flickered. Outside, wind hooted and rain dashed
against walls. His gaze sought Carl's. "We have no helmet or mail that would
fit you. Maybe you can fetch gear for yourself from" wherever you get things."
 
The outsider sat stiff. Lines deepened in his face.
 
Winnithar's shoulders slumped. "Well, this is no fight of yours, is it?" he
sighed. "You're no Teuring."
 
"Carl, oh, Carl!" Jorith came out from among the women.
 
For a while that reached onward, she and the gray man looked at each other.
Then he shook himself, turned to Winnithar, and said: "Fear not. I'll abide
by my friends. But it must be in my own way, and you must follow my redes,
whether or not you understand them. Are you willing to that?"
 
Nobody cheered. A sound like the wind passed down the shadowy length of the
hall.
 
Winnithar mustered heart. "Yes," he said. "Now let riders of ours take
war-arrows around. But the rest of us shall feast."
 
- What happened in the next few weeks was never really known. Men fared,
pitched camp, fought, came home afterward or did not. Those who did, which
was most of them, often had wild tales to tell. They spoke of a blue-cloaked
spearman who rode through the sky on a mount that was not a horse. They spoke
of dreadful monsters charging at Vandal ranks, and eerie lights in the dark,
and blind fear coming upon the foe, until he cast his weapons from him and
fled screaming. They spoke of somehow always finding a Vandal gang before it
had quite reached a Gothic thorp, and putting it to flight, making sheer lack
of loot cause clan after clan to give up and trek off. They spoke of victory.
 
Their chiefs could say slightly more. It was the Wanderer who had told them
where to go, what to await, how best to form array for battle. It was he who
outsped the gale as he brought warning and summons, he who got Greutung and
Taifal and Amaling help, he who overawed the haughty till they worked side by
side as he ordered.
 
These stories faded away in the course of the following lifetime or two. They
were so strange. Rather, they sank back among the older stories of their
kind. Anses, Wanes, trolls, wizards, ghosts, had not such beings again and
again joined the quarrels of men? What mattered was that for a half-score
years, the Goths along the upper Vistula knew peace. Let us get on with the
harvest, said they: or whatever else they wanted to do with their lives.
 
But Carl came back to Jorith as the rescuer.
 
- He could not really wed her. He had no acknowledged kin. Yet men who could
afford it had always taken lemans; the Goths held that to be no shame, if the
man provided well for woman and children. Besides, Carl was no mere swain,
thane, or king. Salvalindis herself brought Jorith to him, where he waited in
a flower-decked loft-room, after a feast at which splendid gifts passed to
and fro.
 
Winnithar had timber cut and ferried across the river, and a goodly house
raised for the two. Carl wanted some odd things in the building, such as a
bedroom by itself. There was also another room, kept locked save when he went
in alone. He was never there long, and no more did he go off to Tiwaz's Shaw.
 
Men said between themselves that he made far too much of Jorith. They were
apt to swap looks, or walk away from others, like some fuzz-cheeked boy and a
thrall girl. However . . . she ran her home well enough, and anyway, who
dared mock at him?
 
He himself left most of a husband's tasks to a steward. He did bring in the
goods that the household needed, or the wherewithal to trade for them. And he
became a great trader. These years of peace were not years of listlessness.
No, they brought more chapmen than ever before, carrying amber, furs, honey,
tallow from the North, wine, glass, metalwork, cloth, fine pottery from the
South and West. Ever eager to meet somebody new, Carl guested passersby
lavishly, and went to the fairs as well as the folkmoots.
 
In those moots he, who was not a tribesman, only watched; but after the day's
talk, things would get lively around his booth.
 
Nonetheless, men wondered, and women too. Word trickled back that a man, gray
but hale, whom nobody formerly knew, was often seen among other Gothic
tribes. . . .
 
It may be that those absences of his were the reason why Jorith was not at
once with child; or it may be that she was rather young, just sixteen
winters, when she came to his bed. A year had gone by before the signs were
unmistakable.
 
Although her sicknesses grew harsh, joy shone from her. Again his behavior
was strange, for he seemed to care less about his get" that she bore than
about her own well-being. He even oversaw what she ate, providing her with
things like out-land fruits regardless of season though forbidding her as
much salt as she was wont to. She obeyed gladly, saying this showed he loved
her.
 
Meanwhile life went on in the neighborhood, and death. At the burials and
grave-ales, nobody made bold to speak freely with Carl; he was too close to
the unknown. On the other hand, the heads of household who had chosen him
were taken aback when he refused the honor of being the man hereabouts who
would swive the next Spring Queen.
 
Remembering what else he had done and was doing on their behalf, they got
over that.
 
Warmth; harvest; bleakness; rebirth; summer again; and Jorith was brought to
her childbed.
 
Long was her toil. She suffered the pains bravely, but the women who attended
her became very glum. The elves would not have liked it had a man seen her
during that time. Bad enough how Carl had demanded unheard-of cleanliness.
They could only hope that he knew what he was about.
 
He waited it out in the main room of his house. When callers came, he had
mead and drink set forth as was right, but stayed curt in his speech.
 
When they left at nightfall, he did not sleep but sat alone in the dark until
sunrise. Now and then the midwife or a helper would shuffle out to tell him
how the birth was going. By the light of the lamp she bore, she saw how his
glance sought the door he kept locked.
 
Late in the second day, the midwife found him among his friends. Silence fell
upon them. Then that which she bore in her arms let out a wail - and
Winnithar a shout. Carl rose, his nostrils white.
 
The woman knelt before him, unfolded the blanket, and on the earthen floor,
at the father's feet, laid a man-child, still bloody but lustily sprattling
and crying. If Carl did not take the babe up onto his knee, she would carry
it into the woods and leave it for the wolves. He never stopped to see if
aught might be wrong with it. He snatched the wee form to him while he
croaked, "Jorith, how fares Jorith?"
 
"Weak," said the midwife. "Go to her now if you will."
 
Carl gave her back his son and hastened to the bedroom. The women who were
there stood aside. He bent over Jorith. She lay white, sweat-clammy, hollowed
out. But when she saw her man, she reached feebly upward and smiled the ghost
of a smile. "Dagobert," she whispered. That was the name, old in her family,
that she had wished for, were this a boy.
 
"Dagobert, yes," Carl said low. Unseemly though it was in sight of the rest,
he bent to kiss her.
 
She lowered her lids and sank back onto the straw. "Thank you," came from her
throat, barely to be heard. "The son of a god."
 
"No-"
 
Suddenly Jorith shuddered. For a moment she clutched at her brow. Her eyes
opened again. The pupils were fixed and wide. She grew bonelessly limp.
Breath rattled in and out.
 
Carl straightened, whirled, and sped from the room. At the locked door, he
took forth his key and went inside. It banged behind him.
 
Salvalindis moved to her daughter's side. "She is dying," she said flatly.
"Can his witchcraft save her? Should it?"
 
The forbidden door swung back. Carl came out, and another. He forgot to close
it. Men glimpsed a thing of metal. Some remembered what he had ridden who
flew above the battlefields. They huddled close, gripped amulets or drew
signs in the air.
 
Carl's companion was a woman, though clad in rainbow-shimmery breeks and
tunic. Her countenance was of a kind never seen before - broad and high in
the cheekbones like a Hun's, but short of nose, coppery-golden of hue,
beneath straight blue-black hair. She held a box by its handle.
 
The two dashed to the bedroom. "Out, out!" Carl roared, and chased the Gothic
women before him like leaves before a storm.
 
He followed them, and now remembered to shut the door on his steed. Turning
around, he saw how everybody stared at him, while they shrank away. "Be not
afraid," he said thickly. "No harm is here. I have but fetched a wise-woman
to help Jorith."
 
For a while they all stood in stillness and gathering murk.
 
The stranger trod forth and beckoned to Carl. There was that about her which
drew a groan from him. He stumbled to her, and she led him by the elbow into
the bedroom. Silence welled out of it.
 
After another while folk heard voices, his full of fury and anguish, hers
calm and ruthless. Nobody understood that tongue.
 
They returned. Carl's face looked aged. "She is sped," he told the others. "I
have closed her eyes. Make ready her burial and feast, Winnithar. I will be
back for that."
 
He and the wise-woman entered the secret room. From the midwife's arms,
Dagobert howled.
 
 
 
2319
 
 
 
I'd flitted uptime to 1930's New York, because I knew that base and its
personnel. The young fellow on duty tried to make a fuss about regulations,
but him I could browbeat. He put through an emergency call for a top-flight
medic. It happened to be Kwei-fei Mendoza who had the opportunity to respond,
though we'd never met. She asked no more questions than were needful before
she joined me on my hopper and we were off to Gothland. Later, however, she
wanted us both at her hospital, on the moon in the twenty-fourth century. I
was in no shape to protest.
 
She had me take a kettle-hot bath and sent me to bed. An electronic skullcap
gave me many hours of sleep.
 
Eventually I received clean clothes, something to eat (I didn't notice what),
and guidance to her office. Seated behind an enormous desk, she waved me to
take a chair. Neither of us spoke for a minute or three.
 
Evading hers, my gaze shifted around. The artificial gravity that kept my
weight as usual did nothing to make the place homelike for me. Not that it
wasn't quite beautiful, in its fashion. The air bore a tinge of roses and
new-mown hay. The carpet was a deep violet in which star-points twinkled.
Subtle colors swirled over the walls. A big window, if window it was, showed
the grandeur of mountains, a craterscape in the distance, heaven black but
reigned over by an Earth nearly full. I lost myself in the sight of that
glorious white-swirled blueness. Jorith had lost herself there, two thousand
years ago.
 
"Well, Agent Farness," Mendoza said at length in Temporal, the Patrol
language, "how do you feel?"
 
"Dazed but clear-headed," I muttered. "No. Like a murderer."
 
"You should certainly have left that child alone." I forced my attention
toward her and replied, "She wasn't a child. Not in her society, or in most
throughout history. The relationship helped me a lot in getting the trust of
the community, therefore in furthering my mission. Not that I was
cold-blooded about it, please believe me. We were in love."
 
"What has your wife to say on that subject? Or did you never tell her?"
 
My defense had left me too exhausted to resent what might else have seemed
nosiness. "Yes, I did. I ... asked her if she'd mind. She thought it over and
decided not. We'd spent our younger days in the 1960's and '70's, remember. .
. . No, you'd scarcely have heard, but that was a period of revolution in
sexual mores."
 
Mendoza smiled rather grimly. "Fashions come and go."
 
"We'd stayed monogamous, my wife and I, but more out of preference than
principle. And look, I always kept visiting her. I love her, I really do."
 
"And she doubtless reckoned it best to let you have your middle-aged fling,"
Mendoza snapped.
 
That stung. "It wasn't! I tell you, I loved Jorith, the Gothic girl, I loved
her too." Grief took me by the throat. "Was there absolutely nothing you
could do?"
 
Mendoza shook her head. Her hands rested quietly on the desk. Her tone
softened. "I told you already. I'll tell you in detail if you wish. The
instruments - no matter how they work, but they showed an aneurysm of the
anterior cerebral artery. It hadn't been bad enough to produce symptoms, but
the stress of a long and difficult primiparous labor caused it to rupture. No
kindness to revive her, after such extensive brain damage."
 
"You couldn't repair that?"
 
"Well, we could have brought the body uptime, restarted the heart and lungs,
and used neuron cloning techniques to produce a person that resembled her,
but who would have had to learn almost everything over from the beginning. My
corps does not do that sort of operation, Agent Farness. It isn't that we
lack compassion, it's simply that we have too many calls on us already, to
help Patrol personnel and their . . . proper families. If ever we started
making exceptions, we'd be swamped. Nor would you have gotten your sweetheart
back, you realize. She would not have gotten herself back."
 
I rallied what force of will was left me. "Suppose we went downtime of her
pregnancy," I said. "We could bring her here, fix that artery, blank her
memories of the whole trip, and return her to - live out a healthy life."
 
"That's your wishfulness speaking. The Patrol does not change what has been.
It preserves it." I sank deeper into my chair. Variable contours sought in
vain to comfort me.
 
Mendoza relented. "But don't feel too much guilt, you," she said. "You
couldn't have known. If the girl had married somebody else, as she surely
would have, the end would have been the same. I get the impression you made
her happier than most females of her era."
 
Her tone gathered strength: "You, though, you've given yourself a wound that
will take long to scar over. It never will, unless you resist the supreme
temptation -to keep going back to her lifetime, seeing her, being with her.
That is forbidden, under severe penalties, and not only because of the risks
it might pose to the time-stream. You'd wreck your spirit, even your mind.
And we need you. Your wife needs you."
 
"Yes," I achieved saying.
 
"Hard enough will be watching your descendants and hers endure what they
must. I wonder if you should not transfer entirely from your project." "No.
Please."
 
"Why not?" she flung at me. "Because I - I can't just abandon them - as if
Jorith had lived and died for nothing."
 
"That will be for your superiors to decide. You'll get a stiff reprimand at
the very least, as close to the black hole as you've orbited. Never again may
you interfere to the degree you did." Mendoza paused, glanced from me,
stroked her chin, and murmured, "Unless certain actions prove necessary to
restore equilibrium. . . . But that is not my province."
 
Her look returned to my misery. Abruptly she leaned forward over the desk,
made a reaching gesture, and said:
 
"Listen, Carl Farness. I'm going to be asked for my opinion of your case.
That's why I brought you here, and why I want to keep you a week or two - to
get a better idea. But already - you're not unique, my friend, in a million
years of Patrol operations! - already I've begun to see you as a decent sort,
who may have blundered but largely through inexperience.
 
"It happens, has happened, will happen, over and over. Isolation, in spite of
furloughs at home and liaisons with prosaic fellow members like me.
Bewilderment, in spite of advance preparation; culture shock; human shock.
You witnessed what to you were wretchedness, poverty, squalor, ignorance,
needless tragedy - worse, callousness, brutality, injustice, wanton
manslaughter - You couldn't encounter that without it hurting you. You had to
assure yourself that your Goths were no worse than you are, merely different;
and you had to seek past that difference to the underlying identity; and then
you had to try to help, and if along the way you suddenly found a door open
on something dear and wonderful -
 
"Yes, inevitably, time travelers, including Patrollers - many of them form
ties. They perform actions, and sometimes those are intimate. It doesn't
normally pose a threat. What matters the precise, the obscure and remote,
ancestry of even a key figure? The continuum yields but rebounds. If its
stress limits aren't exceeded, why, the question becomes unanswerable,
meaningless, whether such minor doings change the past, or have 'always' been
a part of it.
 
"Do not feel too guilty, Farness," she ended, most quietly. "I would also
like to start you recovering from that, and from your grief. You are a field
agent of the Time Patrol; this is not the last mourning you will ever have
reason to do."
 
 
 
302-330
 
 
 
Carl kept his word. Stone-silent, he leaned on his spear and watched while
her kinfolk laid Jorith in the earth and heaped a barrow above her. Afterward
he and her father honored her by an arval to which they bade the whole
neighborhood come, and which lasted three days. There he spoke only when
spoken to, though at those times polite enough in his lordly way. While he
did not seek to dampen anybody's merriment, that feast was quieter than most.
 
When guests had departed, and Carl sat alone by his hearth save for
Winnithar, he told the chieftain: "Tomorrow I go too. You will not see me
often again."
 
"Have you then done whatever you came for?"
 
"No, not yet."
 
Winnithar did not ask what it was. Carl sighed and added: "As far as Weard
allows, I mean to watch over your house. But that may not be so far."
 
At dawn he bade farewell and strode off. Mists lay heavy and chill, soon
hiding him from the sight of men.
 
In years that followed, tales grew. Some thought they had glimpsed his tall
form by twilight, entering the grave-mound as if by a door. Others said no;
he had led her away by the hand. Their memories of him slowly lost humanness.
 
Dagobert's grandparents took the babe in, found a wet nurse, and raised him
like their own. Despite his uncanny begetting, he was not shunned nor let run
wild. Instead, folk reckoned his friendship well worth having, for he must be
destined to mighty deeds - on which account, he should learn honor and seemly
ways, as well as the skills of a warrior, hunter, and husbandman. Children of
gods were not unheard of. They became heroes, or women passing wise and fair,
but were nonetheless mortal.
 
After three years, Carl came briefly calling. As he watched his son, he
murmured, "How he does look like his mother."
 
"Aye, in the face," Winnithar agreed, "but he'll not lack manliness; that's
already plain to see, Carl."
 
None else made bold any more to bespeak the Wanderer by that name - nor by
the name they supposed was right. At drinking time they did as he wished,
saying forth what tales and verses they had lately heard. He asked whence
those sprang, and they could tell him of a bard or two, whom he said he would
visit. He did, later, and the makers reckoned themselves lucky to have his
notice. For his part, he told spellbinding things as of yore. However, now he
was shortly gone again, not to return for years.
 
Meanwhile Dagobert grew apace, a lad brisk, merry, handsome, and well-liked.
He was but twelve when he accompanied his half-brothers, Winnithar's two
oldest sons, on a trip south with a crew of traders. They wintered there, and
came back in spring brimful of wonders. Yes, yonder were lands for the
taking, rich, wide, watered by a Dnieper River that made this Vistula seem a
brook. The northern valleys there were thickly wooded but farther south the
countryside lay open, pastureland for herds and flocks, bride-like awaiting
the farmer's plow. Whoever held it would also sit astride a flow of goods
through the Black Sea ports.
 
As yet, not many Goths had moved thither. It was the westerly tribes that had
made the really great trek, into the lands north of the Danube. There they
were at the Roman frontier, which meant a spate of barter. On the bad side,
should it come to war, the Romans remained formidable - especially if they
could put an end to their civil strife.
 
The Dnieper flowed safely far from the Empire. True, Heruls had come from the
North and settled along the Azov shore: wild men, who would doubtless give
trouble. Yet because they were such wolfish beings, who scorned to wear mail
or fight in ranks, they were less fearsome than the Vandals. Likewise true,
north and east of them laired the Huns, horsemen, stockbreeders, akin to
trolls in their ugliness, filth, and bloodlust. They were said to be the
direst warriors in the world. But the more glory in beating them if they
attacked; and a Gothic league could beat them, for they were split into clans
and tribes, likelier to fight each other than to raid farms and towns.
 
Dagobert was ablaze to be off, and his brothers eager. Winnithar urged
caution. Let them learn more ere making a move that could not be unmade.
Besides, come the time, they should go not as a few families, prey to
reavers, but in force. It looked as though that would soon be possible.
 
For these were the days when Geberic of the Greutung tribe was drawing the
eastern Goths together. Some he fought and broke to his will, others he won
over by talk, whether threat or promise. Among the latter were the Teurings,
who in Dagobert's fifteenth year hailed Geberic their king.
 
This meant that they paid scot to him, which was not heavy; sent men to fight
for him when he wanted, unless it was the season of sowing or harvest; and
heeded such laws as the Great Moot made for the whole realm. In return, they
need no longer beware of fellow. Goths who had joined him, but rather had the
help of these against common foes; trade bloomed; and they themselves had men
at each year's Great Moot, to speak and to vote.
 
Dagobert did well in the king's wars. In between, he would fare south, as a
captain of guards for the chapmen's bands. There he went around and learned
much.
 
Somehow, the rare visits of his father always took place when he was at home.
The Wanderer gave him fine gifts and sage counsel, but talk between them was
awkward, for what can a young fellow say to one like that?
 
Dagobert did lead in making sacrifice at a shrine which Winnithar had built
where the house formerly stood in which the boy was born. That house
Winnithar had burned, for her to have whose howe stood behind it. Strangely,
at this halidom the Wanderer forbade bloodshed. Only first fruits of the
earth might be offered. The story arose that apples cast in the fire before
the stone became the Apples of Life.
 
When Dagobert was full grown, Winnithar sought a good wife for him. This
became Walu-burg, a maiden strong and comely, daughter of Optaris at Staghorn
Dale, who was the second most powerful man among the Teurings. The Wanderer
blessed the wedding by his presence.
 
He was also there when Waluburg bore her first child, a boy whom they named
Tharasmund. In the same year was born the first son of King Geberic that
lived to manhood, Ermanaric.
 
Waluburg throve, giving her man healthy children. Dagobert stayed unrestful,
though; folk said that was the blood of his father in him, and that he heard
the wind at the edge of the world forever calling. When he came back from his
next trip south, he brought news that a Roman lord hight Constantine had
finally put down his rivals and become master of the whole Empire.
 
It may be that this fired Geberic, however forcefully the king had already
gone forth. He spent a few more years rallying the East Goths; then he
summoned them to follow him and make an end of the Vandal pest.
 
Dagobert had by now decided he would indeed move south. The Wanderer had told
him that that would not be unwise; it was the fate of the Goths, and he might
as well be early and get a better pick of holdings. He went about talking
this over with yeomen great and small, for he knew his grandfather was right
about going in strength. Yet when the war arrow came, in honor he could not
but heed. He rode off at the head of better than a hundred men.
 
That was a grim struggle, ending in a battle which fattened wolves and
ravens. There fell the Vandal King Visimar. There too died the older sons of
Winnithar, who had hoped to be off with Dagobert. He himself lived, not even
badly wounded, and won ringing fame by his doughtiness. Some said that the
Wanderer had warded him on the field, spearing foemen, but this he denied.
"My father was there, yes, to be with me on the night before the last clash -
naught else. We spoke of many and strange things. I asked him not to demean
me by doing my fighting for me, and he said that was not the will of Weard."
 
The upshot was that the Vandals were routed, overrun, and forced to depart
their lands. After scouring to and fro for several years beyond the River
Danube, dangerous but wretched, they besought the Emperor Constantine for
leave to settle in his realm. Not loth to have fresh warriors guarding his
marches, he let them cross into Pannonia.
 
Meanwhile Dagobert found himself the leader of the Teurings, through his
marriage, his inheritance, and the name he had won. He spent a time making
them ready, and thereupon took them south.
 
Few stayed behind, so glittering was the hope. Among those who did were old
Winnithar and Salvalindis. When the wagons had creaked away, the Wanderer
sought those two out, one last time, and was kind to them, for the sake of
what had been and of her who slept by the River Vistula.
 
 
 
1980
 
 
 
Manse Everard was not the officer who raked me over the coals for my
recklessness, and barely agreed to let me continue in the mission - largely,
he grumbled, at Herbert Ganz's urging, because there was nobody to replace
me. Everard had his reasons for holding back. Those eventually became
evident, as did the fact he'd been studying my reports.
 
Between the fourth century and the twentieth, I'd passed about two years of
personal lifespan since losing Jorith. My grief had dwindled to wistfulness -
if only she could have had more of the life she loved and made lovely! -
except once in a while when it rose in full force and struck again. In her
quiet way, Laurie had helped me toward acceptance. Never before had I
understood in full what a wonderful person she was.
 
I was at home on furlough, New York, 1932, when Everard called and asked for
another conference. "Just a few questions, a couple hours' bullshooting," he
said, "and afterward we can go out on the town. Your wife too, of course.
Ever see Lola Montez in her heyday? I've got tickets, Paris, 1843."
 
Winter had fallen uptime. Snow tumbled past the windows of his apartment,
making a cave of white stillness for us. He gave me a toddy and inquired what
I particularly liked in the way of music. We agreed on a koto performance, by
a player in medieval Japan whose name the chronicles have forgotten but who
was the finest that ever lived. Time travel has its rewards as well as its
pains.
 
Everard made a production of stuffing and lighting his pipe. "You never filed
an account of your relationship to Jorith," he said in a tone almost casual.
"It only came out in the course of the inquiry, after you'd sent for Mendoza.
Why?"
 
"It was . . . personal," I answered. "Didn't see that it was anybody else's
business. Oh, they cautioned us about that sort of thing at the Academy, but
regs don't actually forbid it."
 
Looking at his dark, bowed head, I had the eerie knowledge that he must have
read everything I would write. He knew my personal future as I did not - as I
would not until I had been through it. The rule is very seldom waived that
keeps an agent from learning his or her destiny; a causal loop is the least
undesirable thing that could all too easily result.
 
"Well, I don't aim to repeat a scolding you've already had," Everard said.
"In fact, between the two of us, I feel that Coordinator Abdullah got
needlessly stuffy. Operatives must have discretion, or they'd never get their
jobs done, and plenty of them have sailed closer to the wind than you did."
 
He spent a minute kindling his tobacco before he went on, through the blue
haze: "However, I would like to ask you about a couple of details. More to
get your reaction than on any deep philosophical grounds - though I admit to
being curious, too. You see, on that basis, maybe I can give you a few useful
procedural suggestions. I'm not a scientist myself, but I have kicked around
history, prehistory, and even posthistory, quite a lot."
 
"You have that," I agreed with enormous respect. "Well, okay, for openers,
the most obvious. Early on, you intervened in a war between Goths and
Vandals. How do you justify that?"
 
"I answered that question at the inquiry, sir ... Manse. I knew better than
to kill anybody, since my own life was never in jeopardy. I helped organize,
I collected intelligence, I inspired fear in the enemy - flying around on
antigrav, throwing illusions, projecting subsonic beams. If anything, by
making them panic, I saved lives on both sides. But my essential reason was
that I'd spent a lot of effort - Patrol effort - establishing a base in the
society I was supposed to study, and the Vandals threatened to destroy that
base." "You weren't afraid of touching off a change in uptime events?"
 
"No. Oh, perhaps I should have thought it over more carefully, and gotten
expert opinions, before acting. But it did look like almost a textbook case.
That was merely a large-scale raid the Vandals were mounting. Nowhere did
history record it. The outcome either way was insignificant. . . except to
individuals, certain of whom were important to my mission as well as me. And
as for the lives of those individuals - and the line of descent that I
started myself, back yonder - why, those are minor statistical fluctuations
in the gene pool. They soon average out."
 
Everard scowled. "You're giving me the standard arguments, Carl, same as you
did the board of inquiry. They got you off the hook there. But don't bother
today. What I'm trying to make you know, not in your forebrain but in your
marrow, is that reality never conforms very well to the textbooks, and
sometimes it doesn't conform at all."
 
"I believe I am beginning to see that." My humility was genuine. "In the
lives I've been following downtime. We have no right to take people over, do
we?"
 
Everard smiled, and I felt free to savor a long draught from my glass. "Good.
Let's drop generalities and get into the details of what you're actually
after. For instance, you gave your Goths things they'd never have had without
you. The physical presents are not to worry about; those'll rust or rot or be
lost quickly enough. But accounts of the world and stories from foreign
cultures."
 
"I had to make myself interesting, didn't I? Why else should they recite old,
familiar stuff for me?"
 
"M-m, yeah, sure. But look, wouldn't whatever you told them get into their
folklore, alter the very matter you went to study?"
 
I allowed myself a chuckle. "No. There I did have a psychosocial calculation
run in advance, and used it for a guide. Turns out that societies of this
kind have highly selective collective memories. Remember, they're illiterate,
and they live in a mental world where marvels are commonplace.
 
What I said about, say, the Romans merely added detail to information they
already had from travelers; and those details would shortly be garbled down
to the general noise level of their concepts of Rome. As for more exotic
material, well, what was somebody like Cuchulainn but one more foredoomed
hero, such as they'd heard scores of yarns about? What was the Han Empire but
one more fabulous country beyond the horizon? My immediate listeners were
impressed; but afterward they passed it on to others, who merged everything
into their existing sagas."
 
Everard nodded. "M-m-m-hm." He smoked for a bit. Abruptly: "What about
yourself? You're not a clutch of words; you're a concrete and enigmatic
person who keeps appearing among them. You propose to do it for generations.
Are you setting up in business as a god?"
 
That was the hard question, for which I'd spent considerable time preparing.
I let another swallow of my drink glow down my throat and warm my stomach
before I replied, slowly: "Yes, I'm afraid so. Not that I intended it or want
it, but it does seem to have happened."
 
Everard scarcely stirred. Lazily as a lion, he drawled, "And you maintain
that doesn't make a historical difference?"
 
"I do. Please listen. I've never claimed to be a god, or demanded divine
prerogatives, or anything like that. Nor do I propose to. It's just come
about. In the nature of the case, I arrived alone, dressed like a wayfarer
but not like a bum. I carried a spear because that's the normal weapon for a
man on foot. Being of the twentieth century, I'm taller than the average for
the fourth, even among Nordic types. My hair and beard are gray. I told
stories, described distant places, and, yes, I did fly through the air and
strike terror into enemies -It couldn't be helped. But I did not, repeat not
establish a new god. I merely fitted an image they'd long worshipped, and in
the course of time, a generation or so, they came to assume I must be him."
 
"What's his name?"
 
"Wodan, among the Goths. Cognate to western German Wotan, English Woden,
Frisian Wons, et cetera. The late Scandinavian version is best known: Odin."
 
I was surprised to see Everard surprised. Well, of course the reports I filed
with the guardian branch of the Patrol were much less detailed than the notes
I was compiling for Ganz. "Hm? Odin? But he was one-eyed, and the boss god,
which I gather you are not. ... Or are you?"
 
"No." How soothing it was to get back into lecture gear. "You're thinking of
the Eddie, the Viking Odin. But he belongs to a different era, centuries
later and hundreds of miles northwestward.
 
"For my Goths, the boss god, as you put it, is Tiwaz. He goes straight back
to the old Indo-European pantheon, along with the other Anses, as opposed to
aboriginal chthonic deities like the Wanes. The Romans identified Tiwaz with
Mars, because he was the war god, but he was much else as well.
 
"The Romans thought Donar, whom the Scandinavians called Thor, must be the
same as Jupiter, because he ruled over weather; but to the Goths, he was a
son of Tiwaz. Likewise for Wodan, whom the Romans identified with Mercury."
 
"So mythology evolved as time passed, eh?" Everard prompted.
 
"Right," I said. "Tiwaz dwindled to the Tyr of Asgard. Little memory of him
was left, except that it was he who'd lost a hand in binding the Wolf that
shall destroy the world. However, 'tyr' as a common noun is a synonym in Old
Norse for 'god.'
 
"Meanwhile Wodan, or Odin, gained importance, till he became the father of
the rest. I think - though this is something we have to investigate someday -
I think that was because the Scandinavians grew extremely warlike. A
psycho-pomp, who'd also acquired shamanistic traits through Finnish
influence, was a natural for a cult among aristocratic warriors; he brought
them to Valhalla. At that, Odin was most popular in Denmark and maybe Sweden.
In Norway and its Icelandic colony, Thor loomed larger."
 
"Fascinating." Everard gusted a sigh. "So much more to know than any of us
will ever live to learn. . . . Well, but tell me about your Wodan figure in
fourth-century eastern Europe."
 
"He still has two eyes," I explained, "but he already has the hat, the cloak,
and the spear, which is really a staff. You see, he's the Wanderer. That's
why the Romans thought he must be Mercury under a different name, same as
they thought the Greek god Hermes must be. It all goes back to the earliest
Indo-European traditions. You can find hints of it in India, Persia, the
Celtic and Slavic myths - but those last are even more poorly chronicled.
Eventually, my service will -
 
"Anyhow. Wodan-Mercury-Hermes is the Wanderer because he's the god of the
wind. This leads to his becoming the patron of travelers and traders. Faring
as widely as he does, he must have learned a great deal, so he likewise
becomes associated with wisdom, poetry . . . and magic. Those attributes join
with the idea of the dead riding on the night wind - they join to make him
the Psycho-pomp, the conductor of the dead down to the Afterworld."
 
Everard blew a smoke ring. His gaze followed it, as if some symbol were in
its twistings. "You've gotten latched onto a pretty strong figure, seems," he
said low.
 
"Yes," I agreed. "Repeat, it was none of my intention. If anything, it
complicates my mission without end. And I'll certainly be careful. But ... it
is a myth which already existed. There were countless stories about Wodan's
appearances among men. That most were fable, while a few reflected events
that really happened - what difference does it make?"
 
Everard drew hard on his pipe. "I dunno. In spite of my study of this
episode, as far as it's gone, I don't know. Maybe nothing, no difference. And
yet I've learned to be wary of archetypes. They have more power than any
science in history has measured. That's why I've been quizzing you like this,
about stuff that should be obvious to me. It isn't, down underneath."
 
He did not so much shrug as shake his shoulders. "Well," he growled, "never
mind the metaphysics. Let's settle a couple of practical matters, and then
get hold of your wife and my date and go have fun."
 
 
 
337
 
 
 
Throughout that day, battle had raged. Again and again had the Huns dashed
themselves over the Gothic ranks, like storm-waves that break on a cliff.
Their arrows darkened the sky ere lances lowered, banners streamed, earth
shook to the thunder of hoofs, and the horsemen charged. Fighters on foot,
the Goths stood fast in their arrays. Pikes slanted forward, swords and axes
and bills gleamed at the ready, bows twanged and slingstones flew, horns
brayed. When the shock came, deep-throated shouts made answer to the yelping
Hunnish war-cries.
 
Thereafter it was hew, stab, pant, sweat, kill, die. When men fell, feet as
well as hoofs crushed rib cages and trampled flesh to red ruin. Iron dinned
on helmets, rattled on ringmail, banged the wood of shields and the hardened
leather of breastplates. Horses wallowed and shrieked, throats pierced or
hocks hamstrung. Wounded men snarled and sought to thrust or grapple. Seldom
was anybody sure whom he had struck or who had smitten him. Madness filled
him, took him unto itself, whirled black through his world.
 
Once had the Huns broken an enemy line. They yelled their glee as they reined
mounts around to butcher from behind. But as if out of nowhere, a fresh
Gothic troop rolled upon them, and now it was they who were trapped. Few
escaped. Otherwise, Hunnish captains who saw a charge fail would sound the
retreat. Those riders were well drilled; they pulled out of bowshot, and for
a while the hosts breathed hard, slaked thirst, cared for their hurt, glared
across the ground between.
 
The sun sank westward, blood-red in a greenish heaven. Its light glimmered on
the river and on the wings of carrion fowl awheel overhead. Shadows ran long
down slopes of silvery grass, welled upward in dales, turned clumps of trees
black and shapeless. A breeze flitted cold across gore-muddied earth, ruffled
the hair of the corpses that lay in windrows, whistled as if to call them
hence.
 
Drums thuttered. The Huns drew into squadrons. A last trumpet shrilled, and
they made their last onslaught.
 
Bone-weary though they were, the Goths cast it back, and reaped men by the
hundreds. Well and truly had Dagobert sprung his trap. When first he heard of
an invader army - slaying, raping, looting, burning - he called for his folk
to gather beneath a single standard. Not only the Teurings, but kindred
settlers heeded. He lured the Huns into this hollow that led down to the
Dnieper, where cavalry was cramped, before his main body poured over the
ridges on either side and barred retreat.
 
His small round shield lay gnawed to splinters. His helmet was battered, his
mail ragged, sword blunt, body a single bruise. Yet he stood in the forefront
of the Gothic center, and his banner flew above him. When the attack came, he
moved like a wildcat.
 
A horse reared huge. He glimpsed the man in the saddle: short but broad, clad
in stenchful skins beneath what armor he had, head shaven save for a pigtail,
thin beard braided in twain, big-nosed face made hideous by patterned scars.
 
The Hun wielded a singlehand ax. Dagobert stepped aside while the hoofs
crashed down. He struck, and met the other weapon on its way. Steel rang.
Sparks showered athwart dusk. Dagobert slewed his blade around and raked it
over the rider's thigh. That would have been a deadly slash had the edge
still been sharp. As was, blood runneled forth. The Hun yammered and smote
anew. He hit the Gothic helmet full on. Dagobert staggered. He regained his
feet - and his enemy was gone, swept off in the whirlwind of struggle.
 
From another horse, suddenly there, a lance struck forward. Dagobert, half
dazed, took it between neck and shoulder. The Hun saw him sink, and pressed
ahead at the hole opened in the Gothic line. From the ground, Dagobert threw
his sword. It hit the Hun's arm and shook loose the spear. Dagobert's nearest
fellow hacked with a bill. The Hun toppled. His body dragged from a stirrup.
 
All at once, there was no fight. Broken, snatched by terror, those of the foe
that lived fled. Not as a host, but each for himself, they stampeded.
 
"After them," Dagobert gasped where he lay. "Let none go free - avenge our
dead, make safety for our land -" Weakly, he slapped the ankle of his
standard bearer. The man bore the banner forward, and the Goths followed,
slaying and slaying. Few indeed were the Huns that returned home.
 
Dagobert pawed at his neck. The point had gone in on the right. Blood pumped
forth. The racket of war moved off. Nearer were the cries of the crippled,
man and horse, and of the ravens that circled low. Those also grew dim in his
hearing. His eyes sought the last glimpse of sun.
 
Air shimmered and stirred. The Wanderer had arrived.
 
He dismounted from his eldritch steed, knelt in the muck, sent hands across
the wound in his son. "Father," Dagobert whispered, a gurgle through the
blood that filled his mouth.
 
Anguish went over the face that he remembered as stern and aloof. "I cannot
save - I may not - they would not -" the Wanderer mumbled.
 
"Have . . . we . . . won?"
 
"Yes. We'll be rid of the Huns for many a year. Your doing."
 
The Goth smiled. "Good. Now take me away, father -"
 
Carl held Dagobert in his arms till death had come, and for a long while
afterward.
 
 
 
1933
 
 
 
"Oh, Laurie!"
 
"Hush, darling. It was to be."
 
"My son, my son!"
 
"Come close. Don't be afraid to cry."
 
"But he was so young, Laurie."
 
"A man grown, just the same. You won't forsake his children, your
grandchildren. Will you?"
 
"No, never. Though what can I do? Tell me what I can do for them. They're
doomed, Jorith's d-d-descendants will die, I may not change that, how can 1
help them?"
 
"We'll think about it later, dear. First, please rest, be quiet, sleep."
 
 
 
337-344
 
 
 
Tharasmund was in his thirteenth winter when his father Dagobert fell.
Nonetheless, after they had buried their leader in a hill-high barrow, the
Teurings hailed the lad their chieftain. A stripling he was, but full of
promise, and they would have no other house than his over them.
 
Besides, after the battle on the Dnieper, they awaited no danger in the
morrow. That had been an alliance of several Hunnish tribes which they
smashed. The rest would not be hasty to move on Goths, nor would the Heruls.
Whatever warfare got waged would likeliest be afar, and not in defense but on
behalf of King Geberic. Tharasmund should have time in which to grow and
learn. Moreover, would he not have the favor and counsel of Wodan?
 
Waluburg his mother married again, a man named Ansgar. He was of lesser
station than she, but well-to-do, able, not greedy for power. He and she
ruled well over their holdings and gave good leadership to their folk until
Tharasmund came of age. If they stayed on thus somewhat beyond that year,
before withdrawing to live quietly, it was at his wish. The restlessness of
his line was in him too, and he wanted freedom to travel.
 
This was well, for in those days many changes passed through the world. A
chieftain must know them before he could hope to deal with them.
 
Rome lay once more at peace with itself, though before he died Constantine
had divided rule of the Empire between East and West. For the Eastern seat of
lordship he had chosen the city Byzantium, renaming it after himself. It
waxed swiftly in size and wealth. After clashes in which they took a
drubbing, the Visigoths made treaty with Rome, and traffic became brisk
across the River Danube.
 
Constantine had declared Christ the single god of the state. Spokesmen for
that faith went far and wide. More and more of the West Goths hearkened.
Those who stayed by Tiwaz and Frija misliked that greatly. Not only might the
old gods grow angry and bring woe to a thankless people; to take the new one
opened a way for Constantinople to win mastery, slowly but without ever a
sword being drawn. The Christians said this counted for less than salvation;
besides, from a worldly standpoint, it was better to be in the Empire than
out. Year by year, embitterment crept between the factions.
 
At their distance, the Ostrogoths were slow to become much aware of these
matters. Christians among them were mostly slaves brought from western parts.
There was a church at Olbia, but it was for the use of Roman traders -
wooden, small and shabby when set against the ancient marble temples, emptily
though those now echoed. However, as the trade grew, dwellers inland also
began to meet Christians, some of them priests. Here and there, free women
took baptism, and a few men.
 
The Teurings would have none of this. Their gods were doing well by them, as
by all the East Goths. Broad acres yielded riches; likewise did barter north
and south, and their share of tribute paid by folk whom the king had overcome.
 
Waluburg and Ansgar built a new hall that would be worthy of Dagobert's son.
On the right bank of the Dnieper it rose, upon a height overlooking the
river's gleam, ripple of wind through grass and croplands, stands of timber
where birds nested in flocks to becloud heaven. Carven dragons reared over
its gables; horns of elk and aurochs above the doors were gilded; pillars
within bore the images of gods - save for Wodan, who had a richly bedecked
halidom nearby. Outbuildings sprang up around it, and lesser homes, until the
thorp could almost be called a village. Life boomed about, men, women,
children, horses, hounds, wagons, weapons, sounds of talk, laughter, song,
footfalls on cobblestones, hammer, saw, wheels, fire, oaths, or now and then
somebody weeping. A shed down by the water held a ship, when it was not
faring abroad, and the wharf often welcomed vessels that plied the stream
with their wonderful cargoes.
 
Heorot, they named the hall, because the Wanderer, wryly smiling, had said
that was the name of a famous dwelling in the North. He came by every few
years, for a few days at a time, to hear what there was to hear.
 
Tharasmund grew up darker than his father, brown-haired, heavier of bone and
features and soul. That was not bad, thought the Teurings. Let him burn off
his lust for adventure early, and gain knowledge as he did; then he ought to
settle down and steer them soberly. They felt they were going to need a
steadfast man at their head. Stories had reached them of a king who was
hauling the Huns together as Geberic had done the Ostrogoths. Word from the
northern mother country was that Geberic's son and likely heir, Ermanaric,
was a cruel and overbearing sort. Moreover, the odds were that erelong the
royal house would move south, out of the swamps and damps, down to these
sunny lands where the bulk of the nation was now found. The Teurings wanted a
leader who could stand up for their rights.
 
The last journey that Tharasmund made began when he was of seventeen winters,
and lasted for three years. It took him through the Black Sea to
Constantinople itself. Thence his ship returned; that was the only news his
kin had of him. Yet they did not fear - because the Wanderer had offered to
accompany his grandson throughout.
 
Afterward Tharasmund and his men had stories to brighten evenings for as long
as they lived. Following their stay in New Rome - marvel upon marvel,
happening upon happening - they went overland, across the province of Moesia
and thus to the Danube. On its far side they settled down among the Visigoths
for a year. The Wanderer had insisted on that, saying that Tharasmund must
form friendships with them.
 
And indeed it came to pass that the youth met Ulrica, a daughter of King
Athanaric. That mighty man still offered to the old gods; and the Wanderer
had sometimes appeared in his realm too. He was glad to make an alliance with
a chieftainly house in the East. As for the young ones, they got along.
Already Ulrica was haughty and hard, but she bade fare to run her household
well, bear sound children, and uphold her man in his doings.
 
Agreement was reached: Tharasmund would proceed home, gifts and pledges would
go back and forth, in a year or so his bride would come to him.
 
The Wanderer stayed but a single night at Heorot before he said farewell. Of
him, Tharasmund and the rest related little other than that he had led them
wisely, albeit he often disappeared for a while. He was too strange for them
to chatter about.
 
Once, though, years later, when Erelieva lay at his side, Tharasmund told
her: "I opened my heart to him. He wanted that, and heard me out, and somehow
it was as if love and pain dwelt together behind his eyes."
 
 
 
1858
 
 
 
Unlike most Patrol agents above the rank of routineer, Herbert Ganz had not
abandoned his former surroundings. Middle-aged when recruited, and a
confirmed bachelor, he liked being Herr Professor at the Friedrich Wilhelm
University in Berlin. As a rule, he would come back from his time trips
within five minutes of departure to resume an orderly, slightly pompous
academic existence. For that matter, his jaunts were seldom to anywhere but a
superbly equipped office centuries uptime, and scarcely ever to the early
Germanic milieus which were his field of research. "They are unsuitable for a
peaceful old scholar," he had said when I asked why. "And vice versa. I would
make a fool of myself, earn contempt, arouse suspicion, perhaps get killed.
No, my usefulness is in study, organization, analysis, hypothesis. Let me
enjoy my life in these decades that suit me. Too soon will they end. Yes, of
course, before Western civilization begins self-destruction in earnest, I
must needs have aged my appearance, until I simulate my death. . . . What
next? Who knows? I will inquire. Perhaps I should simply start over
elsewhere: exempli gratia, post-Napoleonic Bonn or Heidelberg."
 
He felt it incumbent on him to give hospitality to field operatives when they
reported in person. For the fifth time in my lifespan thus far, he and I
followed a gargantuan midday meal by a nap and a stroll along Unter den
Linden. We came back to his house through a summer twilight. Trees breathed
fragrance, horsedrawn vehicles clop-clopped past, gentlemen raised their tall
hats to ladies of their acquaintance whom they met, a nightingale sang in a
rose garden. Occasionally a uniformed Prussian officer strode by, but his
shoulders did not obviously carry the future.
 
The house was spacious, though books and bric-a-brac tended to disguise that
fact. Ganz led me to the library and rang for a maid, who entered arustle in
black dress, white cap and apron. "We shall have coffee and cakes," he
directed. "And, yes, put on the tray a bottle of cognac, with glasses.
Thereafter we are not to be disturbed."
 
When she had left on her errand, he lowered his portly form onto a sofa.
"Emma is a good girl," he remarked while he polished his pince-nez. Patrol
medics could easily have corrected his eyeballs, but he'd have had trouble
explaining why he no longer required lenses, and declared it made no
particular difference. "Of a poor peasant family - ach, they breed fast, but
the nature of life is that it overflows, not true? I take an interest in her.
Avuncular only, I assure you. She is to leave my service in three years
because she marries a fine young man. I will provide a modest dowry in the
guise of a wedding present, and stand godfather to their firstborn." Trouble
crossed the ruddy, jowly visage. "She dies of tuberculosis at the age of
forty-one." He ran a hand over his bare scalp. "I am allowed to do nothing
about that except provide some medicines that make her comfortable. We dare
not mourn, we of the Patrol: certainly not beforehand. I should save pity,
sense of guilt, for my poor unwitting friends and colleagues, the brothers
Grimm. Emma's life is better than most of mankind will ever have known."
 
I made no reply. Our privacy being assured, I got more intent than necessary
on setting up the apparatus I'd brought in my luggage. (Here I passed for a
visiting British scholar. I'd practiced my accent. An American would have
been pestered with too many questions about Red Indians and slavery.) While
Tharasmund and I were among the Visigoths, we'd met Ulfilas. I'd recorded
that event, as I did all of special interest. Surely Ganz would want a look
at Constantinople's chief missionary, the Apostle to the Goths, whose
translation of the Bible was virtually the sole source of information about
their language which survived until time travel came along.
 
The hologram sprang into being. Suddenly the room - chandelier, bookshelves,
up-to-date furniture which I knew as Empire, busts, framed etchings and oils,
crockery, Chinese-motif wallpaper, maroon drapes - became the mystery,
darkness around a campfire. Yet I was not there, in my own skull: for it was
myself on whom I looked, and he was the Wanderer.
 
(The recorders are tiny, operating on the molecular level, self-directing as
they collect full sensory input. Mine, one of several I took along, was
hidden in the spear that I had leaned against a tree. Wanting to encounter
Ulfilas informally, I'd laid out the route of my party to intercept that of
his as we both traveled through what the Romans had known as Dacia before
they withdrew from it, and I in my day knew as Rumania. After mutual avowals
of peaceful intentions, my Ostrogoths and his Byzantines pitched tents and
shared a meal.)
 
Trees walled the forest meadow in gloom. Flame-lit smoke rose to hide stars.
An owl hooted, over and over. The night was still mild, but dew had begun
chilling the grass. Men sat cross-legged near the coals, save for Ulfilas and
me. He had stood up in his zeal, and I could not let myself be dominated
before the others. They stared, listened, furtively drew signs of Ax or Cross.
 
Despite his name - Wulfila, originally - he was short, thick-set,
fleshy-nosed; for he took after Cappadocian grandparents, carried off in the
Gothic raid of 264. In accordance with the treaty of 332, he had gone to
Constantinople as both hostage and envoy. Eventually he returned to the
Visigoths as missionary. The creed he preached was not that of the Nicean
Council, but the austere doctrine of Arius, which it had rejected as heresy.
Nonetheless he moved in the vanguard of Christendom, the morrow.
 
"- No, we should not merely trade stories of our farings," he said. "How can
those be sundered from our faiths?" His tone was soft and reasonable, but
keen was the gaze he leveled at me. "You are no ordinary man, Carl. That I
see plain upon you, and in the eyes of your followers. Let none take offense
if I wonder whether you are entirely human."
 
"I am no evil demon," I said. Was it truly me looming over him, lean, gray,
cloaked, doomed and resigned to foreknowledge - yon figure out of darkness
and the wind? On this night, one and a half thousand years after that night,
I felt as if it were somebody else, Wodan indeed, the forever homeless.
 
Ulfilas' fervor burned at him: "Then you will not fear to debate."
 
"What use, priest? You know well that the Goths are not a people of the Book.
They would offer to Christ in his lands; they often do. But you never offer
to Tiwaz in his."
 
"No, for God has forbidden that we bow down to any save him. It is only God
the Father who may be worshipped. To the Son, let men give due reverence,
yes; but the nature of Christ -" And Ulfilas was off on a sermon.
 
It was not a rant. He knew better. He spoke calmly, sensibly, even
good-humoredly. He did not hesitate to employ pagan imagery, nor did he try
to lay more than a groundwork of ideas before he let conversation go
elsewhere. I saw men of mine nodding thoughtfully. Arianism better fitted
their traditions and temperament than did a Catholicism of which they had no
knowledge anyway. It would be the form of Christianity that all Goths finally
took; and from this would spring centuries of trouble.
 
I had not made a particularly good showing. But then, how could I in honesty
have argued for a heathenism in which I had no belief and which I knew was
going under? For that matter, how could I in honesty have argued for Christ?
 
My eyes, 1858, sought Tharasmund. Much lingered in his young countenance of
Jorith's dear features. .. .
 
- "And how goes the literary research?" Ganz asked when my scene was done.
 
"Quite well." I escaped into facts. "New poems; lines in them that definitely
look ancestral to lines in Widsith and Walt here. To be specific, since the
battle at Dnieper side -" That hurt, but I brought forth my notes and
recordings, and plowed ahead.
 
 
 
344-347
 
 
 
In the same year that Tharasmund returned to Heorot and took up chieftainship
over the Teurings, Geberic died in the hall of his fathers, on a peak of the
High Tatra. His son Ermanaric became king of the Ostrogoths.
 
Late in the next year Ulrica, daughter of Visi-gothic Athanaric, came to her
betrothed Tharasmund, at the head of a great and rich retinue. Their marriage
was a feast long remembered, a week where food, drink, gifts, games,
merriment, and brags went unstinted for hundreds of guests.
 
Because his grandson had asked him to, the Wanderer himself hallowed the
pair, and by torchlight led the bride to the loft where the groom awaited her.
 
There were those, not of the Teuring tribe, who muttered that Tharasmund
seemed overweening, as though he would fain be more than his king's handfast
man.
 
Shortly after the wedding he must hasten off. The Heruls were out and the
marches aflame. To beat them back and lay waste some of their own country
became a winter's work. No sooner was it done but Ermanaric sent word that he
wanted all heads of tribes to meet with him in the motherland.
 
This proved worthwhile. Plans got hammered out for conquests and other things
that needed doing. Ermanaric shifted his court south to where the bulk of his
people were. Besides many of his Greutungs, the tribal chiefs and their
warriors went along. It was a splendid trek, on which bards lavished words
that the Wanderer soon heard chanted.
 
Therefore Ulrica was late in becoming fruitful. However, after Tharasmund met
her again, he soon filled her belly for her, and mightily well. She said to
her women that of course it would be a man-child, and live to become as
renowned as his forebears.
 
She gave him birth one winter night - some said easily, some said scornful of
any pains. Heorot rejoiced. The father sent word around that he would hold a
naming feast.
 
This was a welcome break in the season's murk, added to the Yuletide
gatherings. People flocked thither. Among them were men who thought it might
be a chance to draw Tharasmund aside for a word or two. They bore grudges
against King Ermanaric.
 
The hall was bedight with evergreen boughs, weavings, burnished metal, Roman
glass. Though day reigned yet over snowfields outside, lamps brightened the
long room. Clad in their best, the leading yeomen and wives among the
Teurings ringed the high seat, where rested crib and babe. Lesser folk,
children, hounds crowded along the walls. Sweetness of pine and mead filled
air and heads.
 
Tharasmund stepped forth. In his hand was a holy ax, to hold above his son
while he called down Donar's blessing. From her side Ulrica bore water out of
Frija's well. None there had witnessed anything like this erenow, save for
the firstborn of a royal house.
 
"We are met -" Tharasmund broke off. All eyes swung doorward, and breath went
like a wave. "Oh, I hoped! Be welcome!"
 
Spear slowly thumping floor, the Wanderer neared. He bent his grayness over
the child.
 
"Will you, lord, bestow his name?" Tharasmund asked.
 
"What shall it be?"
 
"From his mother's kin, to bind us closer to the West Goths, Hathawulf."
 
The Wanderer stood altogether still for a while that went on and on. At last
he lifted his head. The hatbrim shadowed his face. "Hathawulf," he said low,
as if to himself. "Oh, yes. I understand now." A little louder: "Weard will
have it so. Well, then, so be it. I will give him his name."
 
 
 
1934
 
 
 
I came out of the New York base into the cold and early darkness of December,
and went uptown afoot. Lights and window displays threw Christmas at me, but
shoppers were not many. On street corners in the wind, Salvation Army
musicians blatted or Santa Clauses rang bells at their kettles for charity,
while sad vendors offered this or that. They didn't have a Depression among
the Goths, I thought. But the Goths had less to lose. Materially, anyway.
Spiritually - who could tell? Not I, no matter how much history I had seen or
would ever see.
 
Laurie heard my tread on the landing and flung our apartment door wide. We
had set the date beforehand for my latest return, after she'd be back from
Chicago, where she had a show. She embraced me hard.
 
As we went on inside, her joy dimmed. We stopped in the middle of the living
room. She took both my hands in hers, regarded me for a mute spell, and asked
low, "What stabbed you . . . this trip?"
 
"Nothing I shouldn't have foreseen," I answered, hearing my voice as dull as
my soul. "Uh, how'd the exhibition go?"
 
"Fine," she replied efficiently. "In fact, two pictures have already sold for
a nice sum." Concern welled forth: "With that out of the way, sit down. Let
me bring you a drink. God, you look blackjacked."
 
"I'm all right. No need to wait on me."
 
"Maybe I feel a need to. Ever think of that?" Laurie hustled me into my usual
armchair. I slumped down in it and stared out the window. Lights afar made a
hectic glimmer along the sill, at the feet of night. The radio was tuned to a
program of carols. "O little town of Bethlehem- "
 
"Kick off your shoes," Laurie advised from the kitchen. I did, and it was as
if that were the real act of homecoming, like a Goth unbuckling his sword
belt.
 
She brought in a pair of stiff Scotch-and-lemons, and brushed lips across my
brow before settling herself in the chair opposite. "Welcome," she said.
"Welcome always." We raised glasses and drank.
 
She waited quietly for me to be ready.
 
I got it out in a rush: "Hamther has been born."
 
"Who?"
 
"Hamther. He and his brother Sorli died trying to avenge their sister."
 
"I know," she whispered. "Oh, Carl, darling."
 
"First child of Tharasmund and Ulrica. The name is actually Hathawulf, but
it's easy to see how that got elided to Hamther as the story flowed north
over centuries. And they want to call their next son Solbern. The timing is
right, too. Those will be young men - will have been - when -" I couldn't go
on.
 
She leaned forward just long enough that a touch of her hand reached my
awareness.
 
Afterward, her tone stark, she said: "You don't have to go through with this.
Do you, Carl?"
 
"What?" Astonishment made me stop hurting for an instant. "Of course I do. My
job, my duty."
 
"Your job is to trace out whatever people put into verses and stories. Not
what they actually did. Skip forward, dear. Let . . . Hathawulf be safely
dead when next you return there."
 
"No!"
 
I realized I'd shouted, took a deep and warming draught, made myself confront
her and state levelly: "I've thought about that. Believe me, I have. And I
can't. Can't abandon them."
 
"Can't help them, either. It's predestined, everything."
 
"We don't know just what will . . . did happen. Or how I might be able to -
No, Laurie, please don't say any more about that."
 
She sighed. "Well, I can understand. You've been with generations of them, as
they grew and lived and suffered and died; but to you it hasn't been so
long." To you, she did not say, Jorith is a very near memory. "Yes, do what
you must, Carl, while you must."
 
I had no words, because I could feel her own pain.
 
She smiled shakily. "You've got a furlough now, though," she said. "Put your
work aside. I went out today and brought back a small Christmas tree. How'd
you like if we trimmed it this evening, after I've fixed a gourmet dinner?"
 
" 'Peace on the earth, good will to men,
 
From Heav'n's all-gracious King- ' "
 
 
 
348-366
 
 
 
Athanaric, king of the West Goths, hated Christ. Besides holding fast to the
gods of his fathers, he feared the Church as a sly agent of the Empire. Let
it gnaw away long enough, he said, and folk would find themselves bending the
knee to Roman overlords. Therefore he egged men on against it, thwarted the
kin of murdered Christians when they sought weregild, at last rammed laws
through his Great Moot that left them open to wholesale slaughter as soon as
some happening made tempers flare. Or so he thought. For their part, the
baptized Goths, who by now were not few, drew together and spoke of letting
the Lord God of Hosts decide the outcome.
 
Bishop Ulfilas called them unwise. Martyrs became saints, he agreed, but it
was the body of the faithful that kept the Word alive on earth. He sought and
obtained permission from Emperor Constantius for his flock to move into
Moesia. Leading them across the Danube, he saw them settled under the Haemus
Mountains. There they became a peaceable lot of herdsmen and farmers.
 
When this news reached Heorot, Ulrica laughed aloud. "Then my father is rid
of them!"
 
She cried that too soon. For the next thirty years and more, Ulfilas worked
on in his vineyard. Not every Christian Visigoth had followed him south. Some
remained, among them chieftains strong enough to protect themselves and their
underlings. These received missionaries, whose labors bore fruit. Athanaric's
persecutions caused the Christians to seek a leader of their own. They found
one in Frithigern, also of the royal house. While it never came to open war
between the factions, there were clashes aplenty. Younger, soon wealthier
than his rival because of being favored by traders from the Empire,
Frithigern brought many West Goths to join the Church as the years wore on,
merely because that seemed a promising thing to do.
 
It touched the Ostrogoths little. The number of Christians among them did
swell, but slowly and without rousing undue trouble. King Ermanaric cared
naught about gods of any sort or about the next world. He was too busy
seizing as much as he could of this one.
 
Up and down eastern Europe his wars raged. In several seasons' fierce
campaigning he broke the Heruls. Those who did not submit moved off to join
westerly tribes bearing the same name. Aestii and Vendi were easier prey for
Ermanaric. Unsated, he took his armies north, beyond the lands that his
father had made tributary. In the end, a sweep of earth from the Elbe River
to the Dnieper mouth acknowledged him overlord.
 
In these farings Tharasmund gained renown and booty. Yet he liked not the
king's harshness. Often in the moots he stood up not only for his own tribe
but for others, on behalf of their ancient rights. Then Ermanaric must needs
back down, however sullenly. The Teurings were as yet too powerful, or he not
powerful enough, for him to make foemen of. This was the more true since many
Goths would have feared to draw blade against a house whose strange forebear
still guested it from time to time.
 
The Wanderer was there when they gave name to the third child of Tharasmund
and Ulrica, Solbern. The second had died in its crib, but Solbern, like his
brother, grew up strong and handsome. The fourth child was a girl, whom they
called Swanhild. For her, too, the Wanderer appeared, but fleetingly, and
thereafter he was not seen for years. Swanhild became very fair to look upon,
and of a sweet and merry nature.
 
Ulrica bore three more children. They were far apart and none lived long.
Tharasmund was mostly away from home, fighting, trading, taking counsel with
men of worth, leading his Teurings in their common business. Upon his returns
he was apt to sleep with Erelieva, the leman he had taken soon after
Swanhild's birth.
 
She was neither slave nor base-born, but the daughter of a well-to-do yeoman.
Indeed, on the distaff side she too descended from Winnithar and Salvalindis.
Tharasmund met her while he rode about among the tribesfolk, as was his
yearly wont when he was abroad, to hear whatever they had on their minds. He
lengthened his stay at that home, and they two were much in each other's
company. Later he sent messengers to ask if she would come to him. They
brought rich gifts for her parents, as well as promises of honor for her and
bonds between the families. This was no offer to refuse lightly, and the lass
was eager, so erelong she went off with Tharasmund's men.
 
He kept his word and cherished her. When she bore him a son, Alawin, he gave
as lavish a feast as he had done for Hatljawulf and Solbern. She had few
further children, and sickness took them away early on, but he did not care
for her the less.
 
Ulrica grew bitter. It was not that Tharasmund kept another woman. Most men
who could afford it did that, and he had gone through more than his share.
What galled Ulrica was the standing he gave Erelieva - second only to her own
in the household, and above it in his heart. She was too proud to start a
fight she would be bound to lose, but her feelings were plain. Toward
Tharasmund she became cold, even when he sought her bed. This made him do so
seldom, and merely in hopes of more offspring.
 
During his lengthy absences, Ulrica went out of her way to scorn Erelieva and
say barbed words about her. The younger woman flushed but bore it quietly.
She had won her friends. It was Ulrica the overbearing who grew lonely.
Therefore she gave much heed to her sons; they grew closely bound to her.
 
Withal, they were mettlesome lads, quick to learn everything that beseemed a
man, well-liked wherever they fared. They were unlike, Hathawulf the hotter,
Solbern the more thoughtful, but fondness linked them. As for their sister
Swanhild, all the Teurings - Erelieva and Alawin among them - loved her.
 
Throughout that time, years passed between visits by the Wanderer, and then
they were short. This brought folk still more into awe of him. When his
craggy form came striding over the hills, men blew a call on horns, and from
Heorot riders galloped forth to greet and escort him. He was even quieter
than of yore. It was as if some secret grief weighed upon him, though none
dared ask what. This showed most sharply whenever Swanhild passed by in her
budding loveliness, or came prideful and atremble if her mother had allowed
her to bring the guest his wine, or sat among the other youngsters at his
feet while he told tales and uttered wise sayings. Once he sighed to her
father, "She is like her great-grandmother." The hardy warrior shivered a
little in his coat. How long had that woman lain dead?
 
At an earlier guesting the Wanderer showed surprise. Since his last
appearance, Erelieva had come to Heorot and had borne her son. Shyly, she
brought the babe to show the Elder. He sat unspeaking for many heartbeats
before he asked, "What is his name?"
 
"Alawin, lord," she answered.
 
"Alawin!" The Wanderer laid hand over brow. "Alawin?" After another while,
almost in a whisper: "But you are Erelieva. Erelieva -Erp -yes, maybe that's
how you'll be remembered, my dear." Nobody understood what he meant.
 
- The years blew by. Throughout, the might of King Ermanaric waxed. Likewise
did his greed and cruelty.
 
When he and Tharasmund were in their fortieth winter, the Wanderer called
again. Those who met him were grim of face and curt of speech. Heorot was
aswarm with armed men. Tharasmund greeted the guest in a bleak gladness.
"Forefather and lord, have you come to our help - you who once drove the
Vandals from olden Gothland?"
 
The Wanderer stood as if graven in stone. "Best you tell me from the
beginning what this is about," he said at last.
 
"So that we may make it clear in our own heads? But it is. Well. . . your
will be done." Tharasmund pondered. "Let me send for two more."
 
Those proved an odd pair. Liuderis, stout and grizzled, was the chieftain's
trustiest man. He served as steward of Tharasmund's lands and as captain of
fighters when Tharasmund was not there himself. The second was a red-haired
youth of fifteen, beardless but strong, with a wrath beyond his years in the
green eyes. Tharasmund named him as Randwar, son of Guthric, not a Teuring
but a Greutung.
 
The four withdrew to a loftroom where they could talk unheard. A short winter
day was drawing to its close. Lamps gave light to see by and a brazier some
warmth, though men sat wrapped in furs and their breath smoked white through
gloominess. It was a room richly furnished, with Roman chairs and a table
where mother-of-pearl was inlaid. Tapestries hung on walls and carvings were
on the shutters across the windows. Servants had brought a flagon of wine and
glass goblets from which to drink it. Sounds of the life everywhere around
boomed up through an oak floor. Well had the son and the grandson of the
Wanderer done for themselves.
 
Yet Tharasmund scowled, shifted about in his seat, ran fingers through
unkempt brown locks and over close-cropped beard, before he could turn to his
visitor and rasp: "We ride to the king, five hundred strong. His latest
outrage is more than anyone may bear. We will have justice for the slain, or
else the red cock shall crow on his roof."
 
He meant fire - uprising, war of Goth upon Goth, overthrow and death.
 
None could tell whether the Wanderer's face stirred. Shadows did, across the
furrows therein, as lamps flickered and murk prowled. "Tell me what he has
done," he said.
 
Tharasmund nodded stiffly at Randwar. "You tell, lad, as you told us."
 
The youth gulped. Fury rose through the bash-fulness he had felt in this
presence. Fist smote knee, over and over, while he related roughly:
 
"Know, lord -though I think you already know - that King Ermanaric had two
nephews, Embrica and Fritla. They were sons of a brother of his, Aiulf, who
fell in war upon the Angles in the North. Ever did Embrica and Fritla fight
well themselves. Here in the South, two years ago, they led a troop eastward
against the Alanic allies of the Huns. They bore home a mighty booty, for
they had sacked a place where the Huns kept tribute wrung from many a region.
Ermanaric heard of it and declared it was his, as king. His nephews said no,
for they had carried out that raid on their own. He asked them to come talk
the matter over. They did, but first they hid the treasure away. Although he
had plighted their safety, Ermanaric had them seized. When they would not
tell him where the hoard was, he first had them tortured, then put to death.
Thereafter he sent men to scour their lands for it. Those failed; but they
ravaged widely about, burned the homes of Aiulf's sons, cut down their
families - to teach obedience, he said. My lord," Randwar screamed, "was that
rightful?"
 
"It is apt to be the way of kings." The Wanderer's tone was like iron given a
voice. "What is your part in the business?"
 
"My . . . my father was also a son of Aiulf, who died young. My uncle Embrica
and his wife raised me. I'd been on a long hunting trip. When I came back,
the steading was an ash heap. Folk told me how Ermanaric's men had had their
way with my foster mother before they slit her throat. She . . . was kin to
this house: I sought hither."
 
He sank back in his chair, struggled not to sob, tossed off his beaker of
wine.
 
"Aye," Tharasmund said heavily, "she, Matha-swentha was my cousin. You know
that high families often marry across tribal lines. Randwar here is more
distant kin to me; nonetheless, we share some of that blood which has been
spilt. Also, he knows where the treasure is, sunken beneath the Dnieper. It
is well that Weard sent him off just then and so spared him from capture.
That gold would buy the king too much might."
 
Liuderis shook his head. "I don't understand," he muttered. "After everything
I've heard, I still don't. Why does Ermanaric behave thus? Has a fiend
possessed him? Or is he only mad?"
 
"I think he is neither," Tharasmund said. "I think in some measure his
counselor Sibicho - not even a Goth, but a Vandal in his service - Sibicho
has hissed evil into his ear. But Ermanaric was always ready to listen, oh,
yes." To the Wanderer: "For years has he been raising the scot we must pay,
and calling free-born women to his bed whether they will or no, and otherwise
riding roughshod over the folk. I think he means to break the will of those
chieftains who have withstood him. If we yield to this latest thing, we will
be the readier to yield to the next."
 
The Wanderer nodded. "Yes, you're doubtless right. I would say, besides, that
Ermanaric envies the power of the Roman Emperor, and wants the same for
himself over the Ostrogoths. Moreover, he hears of Frithigern rising to
oppose Athanaric among the Visigoths, and means to scotch any such rival in
his kingdom."
 
"We ride to demand justice," Tharasmund said. "He must pay double weregild,
and at the Great Moot vow upon the Stone of Tiwaz to abide henceforward by
olden law and right. Else I will raise the whole country against him."
 
"He has many on his side," the Wanderer warned: "some for troth given him,
some for greed or fear, some who feel you must have a strong king to keep
your borders, now when the Huns are gathering themselves together like a
snake coiling to strike."
 
"Yes, but that king need not be Ermanaric!" blazed from Randwar.
 
Hope kindled in Tharasmund. "Lord," he said to the Wanderer, "you who smote
the Vandals, will you stand by your kindred again?"
 
Trouble freighted the answer. "I ... cannot fight in your battles. Weard will
not have it so."
 
Tharasmund was mute for a space. At last he asked, "Will you at least come
with us? Surely the king will heed you."
 
The Wanderer was wordless longer, until there dragged from him: "Yes, I will
see what I can do. But I make no promises. Do you hear me? I make no
promises."
 
And thus he fared off beside the others, at the head of the band.
 
Ermanaric kept dwellings throughout the realm. He and his guards, wisemen,
servants traveled between them. News was that soon after the killings he had
boldly moved to within three days' ride, of Heorot.
 
Those were three days of scant cheer. Snow lay in a crust over the lands. It
creaked beneath hoofs. The sky was low and flat gray, the air still and raw.
Houses huddled under thatch. Trees stood bare, save where firs made a gloom.
Nobody said much or sang at all, not even around the campfire before crawling
into sleeping bags. But when they saw their goal, Tharasmund winded his horn
and they arrived at a full gallop. Cobblestones rang, horses neighed as the
Teur-ings drew rein in the royal courtyard. Guards to about the same number
stood ranked before the hall, spearheads agleam though pennons adroop. "We
will have speech with your master!" Tharasmund roared.
 
That was a chosen insult, a word used as if yonder men were not free but kept
to heel like hounds or Romans. The captain flushed before he snapped, "A few
of you may get leave to enter, but the rest must first pull back."
 
"Yes, do," Tharasmund murmured to Liuderis. The elder warrior growled aloud,
"Oh, we will, since we make you troopers uneasy - but not far, nor idle for
long before we get knowledge that our leaders are safe from treachery."
 
"We have come to talk," said the Wanderer in haste.
 
He, Tharasmund, and Randwar dismounted. Doorkeepers stood aside for them and
they passed through. More guardsmen filled the benches within. Against common
usage, they were armed. At the middle of the east wall, flanked by his
courtiers, Ermanaric sat waiting.
 
He was a big man who bore himself unbendingly. Black locks and spade beard
ringed a stern, lined face. In splendor was he attired, golden bands heavy
over brow and wrists; flamelight shimmered across the metal. His clothes were
of foreign dyed stuffs, trimmed with marten and ermine. In his hand was a
wine goblet, not glass but cut crystal; and rubies sparkled on his fingers.
 
Silent he abided until the three wayworn, mud-splashed newcomers reached his
high seat. A time longer did he glower at them before he said, "Well,
Tharasmund, you go in unusual company."
 
"You know who these are," answered the Teuring chief, "and what our errand
must be."
 
A scrawny, ash-pale man on the king's right, Sibicho the Vandal, whispered in
his ear. Erman-aric nodded. "Sit down, then," he said. "We will drink and
eat."
 
"No," Tharasmund told him. "We will take no salt or stoup of you before you
have made peace with us."
 
"You talk over-boldly, you."
 
The Wanderer lifted his spear on high. A hush fell, which made the longfires
seem to crackle the louder. "If you are wise, king, you will hear this man
out," he said. "Your land lies bleeding. Wash that wound and bind on herbs
ere it swells and sickens."
 
Ermanaric met his gaze and replied, "I do not brook mockery, old one. I will
listen if he keeps watch on his tongue. Tell me in few words what you want,
Tharasmund."
 
That was like a slap on the cheek. The Teuring must swallow thrice before he
could bark out his demands.
 
"I thought you would want some such," Ermanaric said. "Know that Embrica and
Fritla fell on their own deeds. They withheld from their king what was
rightly his. Thieves and foresworn men are outlaw. However, I am forgiving. I
am willing to pay weregild for their families and holdings . . . after that
hoard has been turned over to me."
 
"What?" yelled Randwar. "You dare speak thus, you murderer?"
 
The guardsmen rumbled. Tharasmund laid a warning hand on the boy's arm. To
Ermanaric he said: "We call for double weregild as an acknowledgment of the
wrong you did. No less can we take and still keep our honor. But as for the
ownership of the treasure, let the Great Moot decide; and whatever it
decides, let all of us handsel peace."
 
"I do not haggle," Ermanaric answered in a frosty voice. "Take my offer and
begone - or refuse it and begone, lest I make you sorry for your insolence."
 
The Wanderer trod forth. Again he raised his spear to bring silence. The hat
shadowed his face, making him twice uncanny to behold; the blue cloak fell
from his shoulders like wings. "Hear me," he said. "The gods are righteous.
Whoso flouts the law and grinds down the helpless, him will they bring to
doom. Ermanaric, hearken before it is too late. Hearken before your kingdom
is rent asunder."
 
A mumble and rustle went along the hall. Men stirred, made signs, gripped
hafts as though for comfort. Eyeballs rolled white amidst smoke and dimness.
This was the Wanderer who spoke.
 
Sibicho tugged the king's sleeve and muttered something. Ermanaric nodded. He
leaned forward, his forefinger stabbed like a knife, and he said so that it
rang back from the rafters:
 
"You have guested houses of mine erenow, old one. Ill does it become you to
threaten me. And unwise you are, whatever children and crones and doddering
gaffers may babble of you - unwise you are, if you think I fear you. Yes,
they tell that you're Wodan himself. What care I? I trust in no wispy gods,
but in the strength that is mine."
 
He sprang to his feet. His sword whirred forth and gleamed aloft. "Do you
care to meet me in fight, old gangrel?" he cried. "We can go stake out a
ground this very hour. Meet me there, man to man, and I'll cleave that spear
of yours in twain and drive you howling hence!"
 
The Wanderer did not stir; his weapon shuddered a bit. "Weard will not have
that," he well-nigh whispered. "But I warn you most gravely, for the sake of
every Goth, make peace with these men you have aggrieved."
 
"I will make peace if they will," Ermanaric said, grinning. "You have heard
my offer, Tharas-mund. Do you take it?"
 
The Teuring braced himself, while Randwar snarled like a wolf at bay, the
Wanderer stood as if he were only an idol, and Sibicho leered from the bench.
"No," he croaked. "I cannot."
 
"Then go, the lot of you, before I have you whipped back to your kennels."
 
At that, Randwar drew blade. Tharasmund and Liuderis snatched for theirs;
iron flashed everywhere. The Wanderer said aloud: "We will go, but only for
the sake of the Goths. Bethink you again, king, while yet you are a king."
 
He urged his companions away. Ermanaric began to laugh. His laughter hounded
them down the length of the hall.
 
 
 
1935
 
 
 
Laurie and I went walking in Central Park. March gusted boisterous around us.
A few patches of snow lingered, otherwise grass had started to green. Shrubs
and trees were in bud. Beyond those boughs, the city towers gleamed newly
washed by weather, on into a blueness where some clouds held a regatta. The
chill was just enough to make blood tingle.
 
Lost in my private winter, I scarcely noticed. She gripped my hand. "You
shouldn't have, Carl." I felt how she shared the pain, as far as she was able.
 
"What else could I do?" I replied out of the dark. "Tharasmund asked me to
come along, I told you. How could I refuse, and ever sleep easy again?"
 
"Do you now?" She dropped that question fast. "Okay, maybe it was all right,
allowable, to lend whatever consolation there might be in your presence. But
you spoke up. You tried to head off the conflict."
 
"Blessed are the peacemakers, they taught me in Sunday school."
 
"That clash is inescapable. Isn't it? In the selfsame tales and poems you
went back to study."
 
I shrugged. "Tales. Poems. How much fact is in them? Oh, yes, history knows
what became of Ermanaric at the end. But did Swanhild, Hatha-wulf, Solbern
die as the saga says? If anything of the kind ever happened - if it isn't
just a romantic imaginihg, centuries later, that a chronicler chanced to take
seriously - did it necessarily happen to them?" I cleared my stiffened
throat. "My job in the Patrol is to help discover what the events really were
that it exists to preserve."
 
"Dearest, dearest," she sighed, "you're hurting so much. It's twisting your
judgment. Think. I've thought - oh, but I've thought - and of course I
haven't been there myself, but maybe that's given me a perspective you . . .
you've chosen not to have. Everything you've reported, throughout this whole
affair, everything shows events driving toward a single goal. If you, as a
god, could have bluffed the king into reconciliation, you would have, surely.
But no, that isn't the shape of the continuum."
 
"It flexes, though! What difference can a few barbarians' lives make?"
 
"You're raving, Carl, and you know it. I ... lie awake a lot myself, afraid
of what you might blunder into. You're too close again to what is forbidden.
Maybe you've already crossed the threshold."
 
"The time lines would adjust. They always do."
 
"If that were true, we wouldn't need a Patrol. You must understand the risk
you've been running."
 
I did. I made myself confront it. Nexus points do occur, where it matters how
the dice fell. They aren't oftenest the obvious ones, either.
 
An example bobbed into my memory, like a drowned corpse rising to the
surface. An instructor at the Academy had given it as being suitable for
cadets out of my milieu.
 
Enormous consequences flowed from the Second World War. Foremost was that it
left the Soviets in control of half Europe. (Nuclear weapons were indirect;
they would have come into being at approximately that time regardless, since
the principles were known.) Ultimately, that military-political situation led
to happenings which affected the destiny of humankind for hundreds of years
afterward - therefore forever, because those centuries had their own nexuses.
 
And yet Winston Churchill was right when he called the struggle of 1939-1945
"the Unnecessary War." The weakness of the democracies was important in
bringing it on, true. Nonetheless, there would not have been a threat to make
them quail, had Nazism not taken control of Germany. And that movement,
originally small and scoffed at, later chastised (though far too mildly) by
the Weimar authorities - that movement would not, could not have come to
power in the country of Bach and Goethe, except through the unique genius of
Adolf Hitler. And Hitler's father had been born as Alois Schicklgruber,
illegitimate, result of a chance affair between an Austrian bourgeois and a
housemaid of his. . . .
 
But if you headed off that liaison, which you could easily have done without
harming anybody, then you aborted all history that followed. By 1935, say,
the world would already be different. Maybe it would become better than the
original (in some respects; for a while) or maybe it would become worse. I
could imagine, for example, that humans never got into space. Surely they
would not have done it anywhere near as soon; it might well have occurred too
late to rescue a gutted Earth. I could not imagine that any peaceful Utopia
would have resulted.
 
No matter. If things back in Roman times changed significantly because of me,
I'd still be there; but when I returned to this year, my whole civilization
would never have existed. Laurie would never have.
 
"I ... don't agree I was taking risks," I argued. "My superiors read my
reports, honest reports they are. They'll let me know if I'm going off the
track."
 
Honest? I wondered. Well, yes, they related what I observed and did, without
any lies or concealment, though in spare style. But the Patrol didn't want
emotional breastbeating, did it? And I wasn't expected to render every last
trivial detail, was I? Impossible to do, anyway.
 
I drew breath. "Look," I said, "I know my place. I'm simply a literary and
linguistic scholar. But wherever I can help - wherever I safely can - I've
got to. Don't I?"
 
"You're you, Carl."
 
We walked on. Presently she exclaimed, "Hey, man, you're on furlough,
vacation, remember? We're supposed to relax and enjoy life. I've been making
plans for us. Just listen."
 
I saw tears in her eyes, and did my best to return the cheerfulness she laid
over them.
 
 
 
366-372
 
 
 
Tharasmund led his men back to Heorot. There they disbanded and sought their
own homes. The Wanderer bade farewell. "Do not rush into action," was his
counsel. "Bide your time. Who knows what may happen?"
 
"I think you do," said Tharasmund.
 
"I am no god."
 
"You have told me that more than once, but naught else. What are you, then?"
 
"I may not unhood it. But if this house owes me anything for what I have done
over the years, I claim the debt now, and lay upon you that you gang slowly
and warily."
 
Tharasmund nodded. "I would in any case. It will take time and skill to bring
enough men into a brotherhood that Ermanaric cannot stand against. After all,
most would rather sit on their farms and hope trouble passes them by, whoever
else it may strike. Meanwhile, the king will likeliest not risk an open
breach before he feels he is ready. I must keep ahead of him, but I know full
well that a man can walk farther than he can run."
 
The Wanderer took his hand, made as if to speak, but blinked hard, wheeled,
strode off. The last sight Tharasmund had of him was his hat, cloak, and
spear, away down the winter road.
 
Randwar settled into Heorot, a living remembrance of wrongs. Yet he was too
young and full of life to brood very long. Soon he, Hathawulf, and Solbern
were fast friends, together in hunt, sports, games, every kind of merriment.
He likewise saw much of their sister Swanhild.
 
Equinox brought melting ice, bud, blossom, and leaf. During the cold season
Tharasmund had gone widely around among the Teurings and beyond, to speak in
private with leading men. In spring he stayed home and busied himself with
work upon his lands; and every night he and Erelieva had joy of each other.
 
The day came when he cried cheerily: "We've plowed and sown, cleaned and
rebuilt, midwifed our kine and sent them to pasture. Let's be free for a
while! Tomorrow we hunt."
 
On that dawn he kissed Erelieva in front of all the men who were going with
him, before he sprang to the saddle and led them off. Hounds bayed, horses
whinnied, hoofs thudded, horns lowed. At the edge of sight, where the road
swung around a shaw, he turned about to wave at her.
 
She saw him again that eventide, but then he was a reddened lich.
 
The men who bore him indoors, on a litter made of a cloak lashed to two
spearshafts, told in dulled voices what had happened. Entering the forest
that began several miles hence, they found the trace of a wild boar and set
off after it. Long was the chase before they caught up to the beast. It was a
mighty one, silvery-bristled, tusks like curved daggerblades. Tharasmund
roared his glee. But the heart in this swine was as great as its body. It did
not stand while some hunters got down and others goaded it to charge. At once
it attacked. Tharasmund's horse screamed, knocked off its feet, belly gashed
open. The chief fell heavily. The boar saw, and was upon him. Tusks ripped,
amidst monstrous grunts. Blood spurted.
 
Though the men did soon kill the brute, they muttered that it might well have
been a demon, or bewitched - a sending of Ermanaric's, or of his cunning
counselor Sibicho? However that was, Tharasmund's wounds were too deep to
stanch. He had barely time to reach up and take the hands of his sons.
 
Women keened in the hall and the lesser houses - save for Ulrica, who kept
stony, and Erelieva, who went off to weep alone.
 
While the first of them washed and laid out the corpse, as was her wifely
right, friends of the second hustled her elsewhere. Not much later they got
her married off to a yeoman, a widower whose children needed a stepmother and
who dwelt well away from Heorot. Although only ten years of age, her son
Alawin did the manly thing and stayed. Hathawulf, Solbern, and Swanhild
fended the worst of their mother's spite off him, thereby winning his utter
love.
 
Meanwhile the news of their father's death had flown widely about. Folk had
flocked to the hall, where Ulrica did her man and herself honor. The body was
brought forth from an icehouse where it had rested, richly attired. Liuderis
led those warriors who laid it down in a grave-chamber of logs, together with
sword, spear, shield, helm, ring-byrnie, treasures of gold, silver, amber,
glass, and Roman coins. Hathawulf, son of the house, killed the horse and the
hounds that would follow Tharasmund down hell-road. A fire roared at the
shrine of Wodan as men heaped earth over the tomb until the howe stood high.
Thereafter they rode around and around it, clanging blade on shield and
howling the wolf-howl.
 
An arval followed that went for three days. On the last of these, the
Wanderer appeared.
 
Hathawulf yielded the high seat to him. Ulrica brought him wine. In a hush
that had fallen through the whole glimmering dimness, he drank to the ghost,
to Mother Frija, and to the well-being of the house. Else he said little.
Presently he beckoned Ulrica to him and whispered. They two left the hall and
sought the women's bower.
 
Dusk was closing in, blue-gray in the open windows, murky in the room.
Coolness bore smells of leaf and soil, trill of nightingale, but those seemed
distant, not quite real, to Ulrica. She stared a while at the half-finished
cloth in the loom. "What next does Weard weave?" she asked low.
 
"A shroud," said the Wanderer, "unless you send the shuttle on a new path."
 
She turned to face him and replied, almost as if in mockery, "I? But I am
only a woman. It is my son Hathawulf who steers the Teurings."
 
"Your son. He is young, and has seen less of the world than his father had at
that age. You, Ulrica, Athanaric's daughter, Tharasmund's wife, have both
knowledge and strength, as well as the patience that women must learn. You
can give Hathawulf wise redes if you choose. And ... he is used to listening
to you."
 
"What if I marry again? His pride will raise a wall between us."
 
"Somehow I do not think you will."
 
Ulrica gazed out at the gloaming. "It is not my wish, no. I've had my fill of
that." She turned back to the shadowy countenance. "You bid me stay here and
keep whatever sway I have over him and his brother. Well, what shall I tell
them, Wanderer?"
 
"Speak wisdom. Hard will it be for you to swallow your own pride and not
pursue vengeance on Ermanaric. Harder still will it be for Hathawulf. Yet
surely you understand, Ulrica, that without Tharasmund to lead, the feud can
have only one end. Make your sons see that unless they come to terms with the
king, this family is doomed."
 
Ulrica was long mute. At last she said, "You are right, and I will try." Anew
her eyes sought his through the deepening dark. '"But it will be out of need,
not wish. If ever the chance should come for us to work Ermanaric harm, I
will be the first to urge that we take it. And never will we bow down to that
troll, nor meekly suffer fresh ills at his hands." Her words struck like a
stooping hawk: "You know that. Your blood is in my sons." "I have said what I
must," the Wanderer sighed. "Now do what you can."
 
They returned to the feast. In the morning he departed.
 
Ulrica took his counsel to heart, however bitterly. She had no light task,
making Hathawulf and Solbern agree. They yelled about honor and their good
names. She told them that boldness was not the same as foolishness. Young,
untried, without skill in leadership, they simply had no hope of talking
enough Goths into rebellion. Liuderis, whom she called in, unwillingly bore
her out. Ulrica told her sons that they had no right to bring down
destruction upon the house of their father.
 
Instead let them bargain, she urged. Let them bring the case before the Great
Moot, and abide by its decision if the king did too. Those who had been
wronged were no very close kin; the heirs could better use the weregild that
had been offered than they could use somebody else's revenge; many a chief
and yeoman would be glad that Tharasmund's sons had held back from splitting
the realm, and in years to come would heed them with respect.
 
"But you recall what Father feared," Hathawulf said. "If we give way to him,
Ermanaric will but press us the harder."
 
Ulrica's lips tightened. "I did not say you should allow that," she answered.
"No, if he tries, then by the Wolf that Tiwaz bound, he'll know he was in a
fight! But my hope is that he's too shrewd. He'll hold off."
 
"Until he has the might to overwhelm us."
 
"Oh, that will take time, and meanwhile, of course, we shall be quietly
building our own strength. Remember, you are young. If naught else happens,
you will outlive him. But it may well be you need not wait that long. As he
grows older-"
 
Thus day by day, week by week, Ulrica wore her sons down, until they yielded
to her wishes.
 
Randwar raged at them for treacherous cravens. It well-nigh came to blows.
Swanhild cast herself between her brothers and him. "You are friends!" she
cried. They could not but grumble their way toward a kind of calm.
 
Later Swanhild soothed Randwar the more. She and he walked together down a
lane where blackberries grew, trees soughed and caught sunlight, birds sang.
Her hair flowed golden, her eyes were big and heaven-blue in the fine-boned
face, she moved like a deer. "Need you always mourn?" she asked. "This day is
too lovely for it."
 
"But they who, who fostered me," he stammered, "they lie unavenged."
 
"Surely they know you'll see about that as soon as you can, and are patient.
They have till the end of the world, don't they? You're going to win a name
that will make theirs remembered too; just you wait and see - Look, look!
Those butterflies! A sunset come alive!"
 
Though Randwar never again told Hathawulf and Solbern everything that was in
his heart, he grew easy enough with them. After all, they were Swanhild's
brothers.
 
Men who knew how to speak softly went between Heorot and the king. Ermanaric
surprised them by granting more than hitherto. It was as if he felt, once his
opponent Tharasmund was gone, he could afford a little mildness. He would not
pay double weregild, because that would be to admit wrongdoing. However, he
said, if those who knew where the treasure lay hidden would bring it to the
next Great Moot, he would let the assembly settle its ownership.
 
Thus was agreement made. But while the chaffering went on, Hathawulf, guided
by Ulrica, had other men going around; and he himself spoke to many
householders. This kept on until the gathering after autumnal equinox.
 
There the king set forth his claim to the hoard. It was usage from of old, he
said, that whatever of high value a handfast man might gain while fighting in
the service of his lord should go to that lord, who would deal the booty out
as gifts to those who deserved it or whose goodwill he needed. Else warfare
would become each trooper for himself; the strength of the host would be
blunted, since greed counted for more than glory; quarrels over loot would
rive the ranks. Embrica and Fritla knew this well, but chose not to heed the
law.
 
Thereupon spokesmen whom Ulrica had picked took the word, to the king's
astonishment. He had not expected such a number of them. In their different
ways, they brought the same thought forward. Yes, the Huns and their Alanic
vassals were foemen to the Goths. But Ermanaric had not been fighting them
that year. The raid was a deed that Embrica and Fritla carried out by and for
themselves, as they would have a trading venture. They had fairly won the
treasure and it was theirs.
 
Long and heated went the wrangling, both in council and around the booths set
up at the field. Here was more than a question of law; it was a matter of
whose will should prevail. Ulrica's words, in the mouths of her sons and
their messengers, had convinced enough men that even though Tharasmund was
gone- yes, because Tharasmund was gone - best for them would be if the king
was chastened.
 
Not everybody agreed, or dared admit he agreed. Hence the Goths finally voted
to split the hoard in three equal shares, one for Ermanaric, one each for the
sons of Embrica and Fritla. The king's men having slain those, the two-thirds
fell to Randwar the fosterling. Overnight he became wealthy.
 
Ermanaric rode livid and mum from the meeting. It was long before anyone got
the courage to speak to him. Sibicho was the first. He drew him aside and
they talked for hours. What they said, nobody else heard; but thereafter
Ermanaric was in a better mood.
 
When word of this reached Heorot, Randwar muttered that if yonder weasel was
happy, it boded ill for all birds. Yet the rest of the year passed quietly.
 
A strange thing happened in the following summer, which had also been
peaceful. The Wanderer appeared on the road from the west, as ever he did.
Liuderis led men forth to welcome and escort him. "How fare Tharasmund and
his kin?" the newcomer hailed.
 
"What?" replied Liuderis, astounded. "Tharasmund is dead, lord. Have you
forgotten? You yourself were at the grave-ale."
 
The Gray One stood leaning on his spear like a man stunned. Suddenly, to the
others, the day felt less warm and sunny than before. "Indeed," he said at
last, well-nigh too low to be heard. "I misspoke me." He shook his shoulders,
looked up at the horsemen, and went on louder, faster: "There has been much
on my mind. Forgive me, but I find I cannot guest you this time after all.
Give them my greetings. I will see you later." He swung around and strode
back the way he had come.
 
Men stared, wondered, drew signs against evil. A while afterward, a cowherd
came home and told that the Wanderer had met him in a meadow and asked him at
length about Tharasmund's death. Nobody knew what any of this portended,
though a Christian serving-woman at the hall said it showed how the old gods
were failing and fading.
 
Nonetheless, the sons of Tharasmund received the Wanderer with deference when
he returned in the autumn. They did not venture to ask what had been the
trouble earlier. For his part, he was more outgoing than erstwhile, and
instead of a day or two, he stayed a pair of weeks. Folk marked how much heed
he paid to the younger siblings, Swanhild and Alawin.
 
Of course, it was with Hathawulf and Solbern that he talked in earnest. He
urged that either or both fare west next year, as their father had done in
his youth. "It will pay you well to get to know the Roman countries, and to
cultivate friendship with your kin among the Visigoths," he said. "I myself
can be along to guide, counsel, and interpret."
 
"I fear we cannot," Hathawulf answered heavily. "Not as yet. The Huns wax
ever stronger and bolder. They've begun reaving our marches again. Little
though we like him, we must agree that King Ermanaric is right when he calls
for war, come summer; and Solbern and I would not be laggards therein."
 
"No," said his brother, "and not only for honor's sake. Thus far the king has
stayed his hand, but it's no secret that he loves us not. If we get the name
of cowards or sluggards, and then a threat arises, who will dare or care to
stand beside us?"
 
The Wanderer seemed more grieved by this than might have been awaited.
Finally he said, "Well, Alawin will be twelve - too young to go with you, but
old enough to go with me. Let him."
 
They allowed that, and Alawin went wild for joy. Watching him cartwheel over
the ground, the Wanderer shook his head and murmured, "How like Jorith he
still looks. But then, his descent on both sides is close to her." Sharply,
to Hathawulf: "How well do you and Solbern and he get along?"
 
"Why, very well indeed," said the chieftain, taken aback. "He's a good lad."
 
"There is never a quarrel between you and him?"
 
"Oh, no more than his brashness brings on every once in a while." Hathawulf
stroked his youthfully silky beard. "Yes, our mother has ill will toward him.
She was ever one for nursing grudges. But regardless of what some fools
babble, she keeps no bridle on her sons. If her rede seems wise to us, we
follow it. If not, then not."
 
"Cleave fast to the kindness you have for each other." The Wanderer seemed to
plead, rather than advise or command. "Such is all too rare in this world."
 
- True to his word, he came back in spring. Hathawulf had furnished Alawin a
proper outfit, horses, followers, gold as well as furs to trade. The Wanderer
showed forth the precious gifts he carried, which should help win good
understanding abroad. Taking his leave, he hugged both brothers and their
sister to him.
 
They stood long watching the caravan trek off. Alawin seemed so small, and
his fluttering hair so bright, against the gray and blue that rode at his
side. They did not utter the thought that was in them: how yonder sight
recalled that Wodan was the god who led away the souls of the dead.
 
- Yet after a whole year everyone returned safely. Alawin's limbs were
lengthened, his voice deepened, he himself ablaze with what he had seen and
heard and done.
 
Hathawulf and Solbern bore news less heartening. The war against the Huns had
not gone well last summer. Always made terrible mounted fighters by their
skill and stirrups, the plainsmen had now learned to move under the taut
control of canny leadership. They had not overrun the Goths in any of the
pitched battles that took place, but they had inflicted heavy losses, and one
could not say they had suffered defeat. Gnawed down by sneak attacks, hungry,
bootyless, Ermanaric's host must at length trudge home over the endless
grasslands. He would not try afresh this year; he could not.
 
It was thus a relief to listen to Alawin, evening after evening when folk
were gathered over drink. The fabled realms of Rome awakened dreams.
Nonetheless, some of what he told brought a frown to the brows of Hathawulf
and Solbern, puzzlement to Randwar and Swanhild, an angry sneer to Ulrica.
Why had the Wanderer fared as he did?
 
He had not taken his band first by sea to Constantinople, as with Tharasmund.
Instead, he brought them overland to the Visigoths, where they abode for
months. They paid their respects to heathen Athanaric, but were more at the
court of Christian Frithigern. True, the latter was not only younger but by
now had greater numbers at his beck than did the former, even though
Athanaric still harried Christians in the parts over which he ruled.
 
When at last the Wanderer got leave to enter the Empire and crossed the
Danube into Moesia, again he lingered among Christian Goths, Ulfilas'
settlement, and encouraged Alawin to make friends here too. Later the group
did visit Constantinople, but not for very long. The Wanderer spent much of
that time explaining Roman ways to the youth. They went north again late in
the autumn, and wintered at Frithigern's court. The Visigoth wanted them to
take baptism, and Alawin might have done so, after the churches and other
majesties he had seen along the Golden Horn. In the end he refused, but
politely, explaining that he must not set himself at odds with his brothers.
Frithigern took that well enough, saying merely, "Let the day be soon when
things are otherwise for you." Come spring, mire having dried in the roads,
the Wanderer brought the youngster and their men home. He did not remain
there.
 
That summer Hathawulf married Anslaug, daughter of the Taifal chief.
Ermanaric had tried to forestall this linking.
 
Shortly after, Randwar sought Hathawulf out and asked if they two could talk
alone. They saddled horses and went for a ride through the pastures. It was a
windy day, aboom and aripple across miles of tawny grass. Clouds scudded
dazzling white through the deeps above; their shadows raced over the world.
Cattle grazed ruddy, in far-scattered herds. Game birds burst from underfoot,
and high overhead a hawk was at hover. The coolness of the wind was veined
with a smell of sun-baked earth and of growth.
 
"I can guess what you want," Hathawulf said shrewdly.
 
Randwar passed a hand through his red mane. "Yes. Swanhild for my wife."
 
"Hm. She does seem glad of your nearness." "We will have each other!" Randwar
cried. He checked himself. "It would be well for you. I am rich; and broad
acres lie fallow, awaiting me, in the Greutung land."
 
Hathawulf scowled. "That's rather far hence. Here we can stand together."
 
"Plenty of yeomen there will welcome me. You'll not lose a comrade, you'll
gain an ally."
 
Still Hathawulf hung back, until Randwar blurted: "It'll happen regardless.
Our hearts will have it so. Best you go along with Weard."
 
"You've ever been rash," said the chieftain, not unkindly though trouble
weighted his tones. "Your belief that mere feelings between man and woman are
enough to make a sound marriage -it speaks ill of your judgment. Left to
yourself, what might you undertake of unwisdom?"
 
Rand war gasped- Before he had time to grow angry, Hathawulf laid a hand on
his shoulder and went on, smiling a bit sadly: "I meant no insult there. I
only want to make you think twice. That's not your wont, I know, but I ask
that you try. For Swanhild."
 
Randwar showed he could hold his tongue.
 
When they came back, Swanhild sped into the courtyard. She caught her
brother's knee. Her eagerness tumbled upward: "Oh, Hathawulf, it's all right,
isn't it? You said yes, I know you did. Never have you made me happier."
 
The upshot was that a huge wedding feast swirled and shouted through Heorot
that autumn. For Swanhild there was but one shadow upon it, that the Wanderer
was elsewhere. She had taken it for given that he would hallow her and her
man. Was he not the Watcher over this family?
 
In the meantime Randwar had sent men east to his holdings. They raised a new
home where Embrica's had been and staffed it well. The young couple journeyed
thither in a splendid company, Swanhild carried over the threshold those
evergreen boughs that called on Frija's blessing, Randwar gave a feast for
the neighborhood, and there they were.
 
Soon, however, much though he loved his bride, he was often away for days on
end. He rode around the Greutung countryside, getting to know the dwellers.
When a man seemed of the right mind, Randwar would take him aside and they
would talk about other matters than kine, trade, or even the Huns.
 
On a dark day before solstice, when a few snowflakes drifted down onto frozen
earth, hounds barked outside the hall. Randwar took a spear at the doorway
and stepped forth to see what this was. Two burly farmhands came after,
likewise armed. But when he spied the tall form that strode into his
courtyard, Randwar grounded his weapon and cried, "Hail! Welcome!"
 
Hearing that no danger threatened, Swanhild hurried out too. Her eyes and
hair, beneath a wife's kerchief, and the white gown that hugged her litheness
were the only things bright, anywhere around. Joy lilted from her: "Oh,
Wanderer, dear Wanderer, yes, welcome!"
 
He trod nigh until she could see beneath the shadowing hat. She raised hand
to parted lips. "But you are full of woe," she breathed. "Are you not? What's
wrong?"
 
"I am sorry," he answered in words that fell like stones. "Some things must
stay secret. I kept away from your wedding because I would not cast gloom
over it. Now - Well, Randwar, I have traveled a troublous road. Let me rest
before we speak of this. Let us drink something hot and remember earlier
times."
 
A little of his olden interest kindled that eventide, when a man chanted a
lay about the last campaign into Hunland. In return he told new stories,
though in less lively wise than of yore, as if he must flog himself to do it.
Swanhild sighed happily. "I cannot wait till my children sit and hear you,"
she said, albeit she did not yet have any on the way. She was the least bit
frightened to see him flinch.
 
Next day he led Rand war off. They spent hours by themselves. Later the
Greutung told his woman:
 
"He warned me over and over of what hatred Ermanaric bears us. Here we are in
the king's own tribal country, he said, our strength not firm while our
wealth is a glittering lure. He wanted us to pull up stakes and move away -
far away, clear to West Gothland - soon. Of course I would have none of that.
Whatever the Wanderer is, right and honor are mightier. Then he said he knew
I'd already been sounding men out about getting together against the king, to
withstand his overbearingness and, if need be, fight. The Wanderer said I
could not hope to keep this hidden, and it was madness."
 
"What did you answer to that?" she asked half fearfully.
 
"Why, I said free Goths have the right to open their minds to each other. And
I said my foster parents never have been avenged. If the gods will not do
justice, men must."
 
"You should hearken to him. He knows more than we ever will."
 
"Well, I'm not about to try anything reckless. I'll watch for my chance. More
may not be needful. Men often die untimely; if good men like Tharasmund, why
not evil ones like Ermanaric? No, my darling, never will we skulk off from
these our lands, that belong to our unborn sons. Therefore we must make ready
to defend them; true?" Randwar drew Swanhild to him. "Come," he laughed,
"let's begin by doing something about those children."
 
The Wanderer could not move him, and after a few more days said farewell.
"When will we see you again?" Swanhild asked as they stood in the doorway.
 
"I think-" he faltered. "I can't - Oh, girl who is like Jorith!" He embraced
her, kissed her, let her go, and hurried off. Shocked, folk heard him weeping.
 
Yet back among the Teurings he was steely. Much was he there in the months
that followed, both at Heorot and widely among yeomen, chapmen, or common
fieldhands, workers, sailors.
 
Even coming from him, that which he urged upon them was naught they were
quick to agree to. He wanted them to make closer ties with the West. They did
not merely stand to gain from heightened trade. If woe came upon them here -
carried, say, by the Huns - then they would have a place to go. Next summer,
let them send men and goods to Frithigern, who would safeguard those; and let
them keep ships, wagons, gear, food standing by; and let many of them learn
about the lands in between and how to get through unharmed.
 
The Ostrogoths wondered and muttered. They were doubtful about a fast growth
of trade across such distances, therefore unwilling to gamble work or wealth.
As for leaving their homes, that was unthinkable. Did the Wanderer speak
sooth? What was he, anyhow? He was often called a god, and did seem to have
been around for a very long time; but he made no claims for himself. He might
be a troll, a black wizard, or - said the Christians - a devil sent to lure
men astray. Or he might simply be getting foolish at his high age.
 
The Wanderer kept on. Some who listened found his words worth further
thought; and some, young, he kindled. Foremost among the latter was Alawin at
Heorot - though Hathawulf grew wistful, while Solbern hung back.
 
To and fro the Wanderer went on earth, talking, scheming, ordering. By
autumnal equinox he had gotten a skeleton of what he wanted. Gold, goods, men
to attend these were now at Frithigern's seat in the West; Alawin would go
there the following year to push for more trade, regardless of how young he
was; at Heorot and numerous other households, dwellers could depart on short
notice, should the need arise.
 
"You have worn yourself out for us," Hathawulf said to him at the end of his
last stay in the hall. "If you are of the Anses, then they are not tireless."
 
"No," sighed the Wanderer. "They too shall perish in the wreck of the world."
 
"But that is far off in time, surely."
 
"World after world has gone down in ruin erenow, my son, and will in the
years and thousands of years to come. I have done for you what I was able."
 
Hathawulf's wife Anslaug entered, to say her own farewell. At her breast she
suckled their first-born. The Wanderer gazed long upon the babe. "There lies
tomorrow," he whispered. Nobody understood what he meant. Soon he was walking
off, he and his spear-staff, down a road where lately fallen leaves flew on a
chill blast.
 
And soon after that, the terrible news came to Heorot.
 
Ermanaric the king had given out that he intended a foray into Hunland. This
would not be an outright war, such as had failed before. Hence he did not
call up a levy, but only his full troop of guards, several hundred warriors
well-known and faithful to him. The Huns had been wasting the borders again.
He would punish them. A swift, hard strike should at the least kill off many
of their cattle. With luck, it might surprise a camp or three of theirs.
Goths nodded when that word reached their steadings. Fatten ravens in the
East, and the filthy landloupers of the steppe might slouch back to wherever
their forebears had spawned them.
 
But when his troop had gathered, Ermanaric did not lead it so far. Suddenly,
there it was at Randwar's hall, while the homes of Randwar's friends stood
afire from horizon to horizon.
 
Scant was the fighting, as great a strength as the king had brought against
an unwarned young man. Shoved along, hands tied behind his back, Randwar
stumbled forth into his courtyard. Blood trickled and clotted over his scalp.
He had killed three of those who set on him, but their orders were to take
him alive, and they wielded clubs and spearbutts until he sank.
 
This was a bleak evening, where wind shrilled. Tatters of smoke mingled with
scudding wrack. Sunset smoldered. A few slain defenders sprawled on the
cobbles. Swanhild stood dumb in the grip of two warriors, near Ermanaric on
his horse. It was as if she did not understand what had happened, as if
nothing was real save the child that bulged her belly.
 
The king's men brought Randwar before him. He peered downward at the
prisoner. "Well," he greeted, "what have to say for yourself?"
 
Randwar spoke thickly, though he held his battered head aloft: "That I did
not fall by stealth on one who had done me no wrong."
 
"Well, now." Ermanaric's fingers combed a beard turning white. "Well, now. Is
it right to plot against your lord? Is it right to slink about heelbiting?"
 
"I ... did none of that. ... I would but ward the honor and freedom ... of
the Goths -" Rand-war's dried throat could get no more out.
 
"Traitor!" screamed Ermanaric, and launched into a long tirade. Randwar
stood, hunched, belike not hearing much of it.
 
When he saw that, Ermanaric stopped. "Enough," he said. "Hang him by the neck
and leave him for the crows, like any thief."
 
Swanhild shrieked and struggled. Randwar threw her a blurred look before he
turned it on the king and answered, "If you hang me, I go to Wodan my
forefather. He . . . will avenge -"
 
Ermanaric shot forth a foot and kicked Randwar in the mouth. "Up with him!"
 
A haylift beam jutted from a barn. Men had already thrown a rope over it.
They put the noose about Randwar's neck, hauled him aloft, and made the rope
fast. He struggled long before he swung free in the wind.
 
"Yes, the Wanderer will have you, Ermanaric!" Swanhild yelled. "I lay the
widow's curse on you, murderer, and I call Wodan against you! Wanderer, lead
him down to the coldest cave in hell!"
 
Greutungs shuddered, drew signs or clutched at talismans. Ermanaric himself
showed unease. Sibicho, perched on horseback beside him, yelped: "She calls
on her witchy ancestor? Suffer her not to live! Let earth purify itself of
that blood she bears!"
 
"Aye," Ermanaric said in an uprush of will. He rapped forth his command.
 
Fear more than aught else gave haste to the men. Those who had held Swanhild
cuffed her till she staggered, and booted her out into the middle of the
yard. She lay stunned on the stones. Riders crowded around, forcing their
horses, which neighed and reared. When they withdrew, nothing was left but
red mush and white splinters.
 
Night fell. Ermanaric led his troop into Rand-war's hall for a victory feast.
In the morning they found the treasure and took it back with them. The rope
creaked where Randwar swung above that which had been Swanhild.
 
Such was the news that men bore to Heorot. They had hastily buried the dead.
Most dared do no more than that, but a few Greutungs felt vengeful, as did
all Teurings.
 
Rage and grief overwhelmed the brothers of Swanhild. Ulrica was colder,
locked into herself. Yet when they wondered what they could do, even though
tribesmen of theirs had swarmed to them from widely about . . . she drew her
sons aside, and they talked until the restless darkness fell.
 
Those three entered the hall. They said they had decided. Best to strike back
at once. True, the king would be wary of that, and keep his guard on hand for
a while. However, by the accounts of witnesses who had seen it ride past, it
was hardly larger than the band which crowded this building tonight. A
surprise onslaught by brave men could vanquish it. To wait would give
Ermanaric time he needed and was doubtless counting on - time to crush every
last East Goth who would be free.
 
Men bellowed their willingness. Young Alawin joined them. But suddenly the
door opened, and there was the Wanderer. Sternly, he bade Tharas-mund's
last-born son abide here, before he went back into the night and the wind.
 
Undaunted, Hathawulf, Solbern, and their men rode forth at dawn.
 
 
 
1935
 
 
 
I had fled home to Laurie. But next day, when I let myself into our place
after a long walk, she was not waiting. Instead, Manse Everard rose from my
armchair. His pipe had made the air hazed and acrid.
 
"Huh?" I could only exclaim.
 
He stalked close. I felt his footfalls. As tall as I and heavier-boned, he
seemed to loom. His face was expressionless. The window at his back framed
him in sky.
 
"Laurie's okay," he said like a machine. "I asked her to absent herself.
This'll be plenty rough on you without watching her get shocked and hurt."
 
He took my elbow. "Sit down, Carl. You've been through the wringer, plain to
see. Figured you'd take a vacation, did you?"
 
I slumped into my seat and stared down at the rug. "Got to," I mumbled. "Oh,
I'll make sure of any loose ends, but first - God, it's been ghastly -"
 
"No."
 
"What?" I lifted my gaze. He stood above me, feet apart, fists on hips,
overshadowing. "I tell you, I can't."
 
"Can and will," he growled. "You'll come back with me to base. Right away.
You've had a night's sleep. Well, that's all you'll get till this is over. No
tranquilizers, either. You'll have to feel everything to the hilt as it
happens. You'll need full alertness. Besides, there's nothing like pain for
driving a lesson in permanently. Most important, maybe - if you don't let
that pain go through you, the way nature intended, you'll never really be rid
of it. You'll be a haunted man. The Patrol deserves better. So does Laurie.
And even you yourself."
 
"What are you talking about?" I asked while the horror rose in a tide around
me.
 
"You've got to finish the business you started. The sooner the better, for
you above all. What kind of vacation could you have if you knew that duty lay
ahead? It'd destroy you. No, do the job at once, get it behind you on your
world line; then you can rest and start recovering."
 
I shook my head, not in negation but in bewilderment. "Did I go wrong? How? I
filed my reports regularly. If I was straying off the reservation again, why
didn't some officer call me in and explain?"
 
"That's what I'm doing, Carl." A ghost of gentleness passed into Everard's
voice. He sat down opposite me and busied his hands with his pipe.
 
"Causal loops are often very subtle things," he said. Despite the soft tone,
that phrase shocked me to full awareness. He nodded. "Yeah. We've got one
here. The time traveler becomes a cause of the selfsame events he set out to
study or otherwise deal with."
 
"But - no, Manse, how?" I protested. "I've not forgotten the principles. I
never did forget them, in the field or anywhere, anywhen else. Sure, I became
part of the past, but a part that fitted into what was already there. We went
through this at the inquiry and - and I corrected what mistakes I had been
making."
 
Everard's lighter cast a startling snap through the room. "I said they can be
very subtle," he repeated. "I looked deeper into your case mainly because of
a hunch, an uneasy feeling that something wasn't right. It involved a lot
more than reading your reports - which, by the way, are satisfactory. They're
simply insufficient. No blame to you for that. Even with a long experience
under your belt, you'd probably have missed the implications, as closely
involved in the events as you've been. Me, I had to steep myself in knowledge
of that milieu, and rove it from end to end, over and over, before the
situation was clear to me."
 
He drew hard on his pipe. "Never mind technical details," he went on.
"Basically, your Wanderer became stronger than you realized. It turns out
that poems, stories, traditions which flowed on for centuries, transmuting,
cross-breeding, influential on people - a number of those had their sources
in him. Not the mythical Wodan, but the physically present person, you
yourself."
 
I had seen this coming and mustered my defense. "A calculated risk from the
outset," I said. "Not uncommon. If feedback like that occurs, it's no
disaster. What my team is tracing are simply the words, oral and literary.
Their original inspirations are beside the point. Nor does it make any
difference to subsequent history . . . whether or not, for a while, a man was
there whom certain individuals took for one of their gods ... as long as the
man didn't abuse his position." I hesitated. "True?"
 
He dashed my wan hope. "Not necessarily. Not in this instance, for sure. An
incipient causal loop is always dangerous, you know. It can set up a
resonance, and the changes of history that that produces can multiply
catastrophically. The single way to make it safe is to close it. When the
Worm Ouroboros is biting his own tail, he can't devour anything else."
 
"But . . . Manse, I left Hathawulf and Solbern bound off to their deaths. . .
. Okay, I confess attempting to prevent it, not supposing it was of any
importance to mankind as a whole. I failed. Even in something that minor, the
continuum was too rigid."
 
"How do you know you failed? Your presence through the generations, the
veritable Wodan, did more than put genes of yours into the family. It
heartened the members, inspired them to become great. Now at the end - the
battle against Ermanaric looks like touch and go. Given the conviction that
Wodan is on their side, the rebels may very well carry the day."
 
"What? Do you mean - -Oh, Manse!" "They mustn't," he said.
 
Agony surged higher still. "Why not? Who'll care after a few decades, let
alone a millennium and a half?"
 
"Why, you will, you and your colleagues," the pitying, implacable voice
declared. "You set out to investigate the roots of a specific story about
Hamther and Sorli, remember? Not to mention the Eddie poets and saga writers
before you, and God knows how many tellers before them, affected in small
ways that could add up to a big final sum. Mainly, though, Ermanaric is a
historical figure, prominent in his era. The date and manner of his death are
a matter of record. What came immediately afterward shook the world.
 
"No, this is no slight ripple in the time-stream. This is a maelstrom
abuilding. We've got to damp it out, and the only way to do that is to
complete the causal loop, close the ring."
 
My lips formed the useless, needless "How?" which throat and tongue could not.
 
Everard pronounced sentence on me: "I'm sorrier than you imagine, Carl. But
the Volsungasaga relates that Hamther and Sorli were almost victorious, when
for unknown reasons Odin appeared and betrayed them. And he was you. He could
be nobody else but you."
 
 
 
372
 
 
 
Night had lately fallen. The moon, while little past the full, was not yet
up. Stars threw a dimness over hills and shaws, where shadows laired. Dew had
begun to gleam on stones. The air was cold, quiet save for a drumroll of many
galloping hoofs. Helmets and spearheads shimmered, rose and sank like waves
under a storm.
 
In the greatest of his halls, King Ermanaric sat at drink with his sons and
most of his warriors. The fires flared, hissed, crackled in their trenches.
 
Lamplight glowed through smoke. Antlers, furs, tapestries, carvings seemed to
move along walls and pillars, as the darknesses did. Gold gleamed on arms and
around necks, beakers clashed together, voices dinned hoarsely. Thralls
scuttled about, attending. Overhead, murk crouched on the rafters and filled
the roof peak.
 
Ermanaric would fain be merry. Sibicho pestered him: "- Lord, we should not
dawdle. 1 grant you, a straightforward raid on the Teurings' chieftain would
be dangerous, but we can start work at once to undermine his standing among
them."
 
"Tomorrow, tomorrow," said the king impatiently. "Do you never weary of plots
and tricks, you? Tonight is for that toothsome slave maiden I bought - "
 
Horns clamored outside. A man staggered in through the entryroom that this
building had. Blood smeared his face. "Foemen - attack -" An uproar drowned
his cry.
 
"At this hour?" Sibicho wailed. "And by surprise? They must have killed
horses traveling hither - yes, and cut down everybody along the way who might
have outsped them -"
 
Men boiled off the benches and went for their mail and weapons. Those being
stacked in the entryroom, there was a sudden jam of bodies. Oaths lifted,
fists flailed. The guards who had stayed equipped sprang to make a bulwark in
front of the king and his nearest. He always kept a score of them full-armed.
 
In the courtyard, royal warriors spent their lives on time for their comrades
within to make ready. The newcomers bore against them in overwhelming
numbers. Axes thundered, swords clanged, knives and spears bit deep. In that
press, slain men did not always fall down at once; wounded who dropped never
got up again.
 
At the head of the onslaught, a big young man shouted, "Wodan with us! Wodan,
Wodan! Haa!" His blade flew murderous.
 
Hastily outfitted defenders took stance at the front door. The big young man
was first to shock upon them. Right and left, his followers broke through,
smote, stabbed, kicked, shoved, burst the line and stamped in over the pieces
of it.
 
As their van pierced through to the main room, the unarmored troopers beyond
stumbled back. The attackers halted, panting, when their leader called, "Wait
for the rest of us!" The racket of battle died away inside, though outside it
still raged.
 
Ermanaric sprang onto his high seat and looked across the helmets of his
bodyguards. Even in the dancing gloom, he saw who stood at the door.
"Hathawulf Tharasmundsson, what new misdeed would you wreak?" he flung
through the lodge.
 
The Teuring lifted his dripping sword on high. "We have come to cleanse the
earth of you," rang from him.
 
"Beware. The gods hate traitors."
 
"Yes," answered Solbern at his brother's shoulder, "this night Wodan fetches
you, oathbreaker, and ill is that house to which he will take you."
 
More invaders poured through; Liuderis pushed them into ragged ranks.
"Onward!" Hathawulf bawled.
 
Ermanaric had been giving his own orders. His men might mostly lack helmet,
byrnie, shield, long weapon. But each bore a knife, at least. Nor did the
Teurings have much iron to wear. They were mainly yeomen, who could afford
little more than a metal cap and a coat of stiffened leather, and who went to
battle only when the king raised a levy. Those whom Ermanaric had gathered
were warriors by trade; any of them might have a farm or a ship or the like,
but he was first and foremost a warrior. He was well drilled in standing side
by side with his fellows.
 
The king's troopers snatched at trestles and the boards that had lain on top.
These they used to ward themselves. Those that had axes, having retreated
before the inroad, chopped cudgels for their fellows out of wainscots and
pillars. Besides a knife, a stag's tine off the wall, the narrow end of a
drinking horn, a broken Roman goblet, a brand from the firetrenches made a
deadly weapon. As tightly wedged as the struggle became - flesh against
flesh, friend in the way of friend, pushing, stumbling, slipping in blood and
sweat - sword or ax was of scant more help. Spears and bills were useless,
save that from their stance on the benches by the high seat, the armored
guards could strike downward.
 
Thus the fight became formless, blind, a fury as of the Wolf unbound.
 
Yet Hathawulf, Solbern, and their best men beat a path onward, pushed,
rammed, hewed, slashed, stabbed, amidst bellow and shriek, thud and clash,
onward, living stormwinds - until at last they came to their mark.
 
There they set shield against shield, loosed steel upon steel, they and the
king's household troopers. Ermanaric was not in that front line, but he
boldly stood above on the seat, before the gaze of all, and wielded a spear.
Often did he trade a look with Hathawulf or Solbern, and then each grinned
his hatred.
 
It was old Liuderis who broke through the line. His lifeblood spurted from
thigh and forearm, but his ax beat right and left, he won as far as the bench
and clove the skull of Sibicho. Dying, he rasped, "One snake the less."
 
Hathawulf and Solbern passed over his body. A son of Ermanaric threw himself
before his father. Solbern cut the boy down. Hathawulf struck beyond.
Ermanaric's spearshaft cracked across. Hathawulf struck again. The king
reeled back against the wall. His right arm dangled half severed. Solbern
slashed low, at the left leg, and hamstrung him. He crumpled, still snarling.
The brothers moved in for the kill. Their followers strove to keep the last
of the royal guard off their backs.
 
Someone appeared.
 
A stop to the fighting spread through the hall like the wave when a rock
falls in a pool. Men stood agape and agasp. Through the unrestful gloom, made
the thicker by their crowding, they barely saw what hovered above the high
seat.
 
On a skeletal horse, whose bones were of metal, sat a tall graybearded man.
Hat and cloak hid any real sight of him. In his right hand he bore a spear.
Its head, above every other weapon and limned against the night under the
roof, caught fire-glow - a comet, a harbinger of woe?
 
Hathawulf and Solbern let their blades sink. "Forefather," the elder breathed
into the sudden hush. "Have you come to our help?"
 
The answer rolled forth unhumanly deep, loud, and ruthless: "Brothers, your
doom is upon you. Meet it well and your names will live.
 
"Ermanaric, this is not yet your time. Send your men out the rear and take
the Teurings from behind.
 
"Go, all of you here, to wherever Weard will have you go."
 
He was not there.
 
Hathawulf and Solbern stood stunned.
 
Crippled, bleeding, Ermanaric could nonetheless shout: "Heed! Stand fast
where you're up against the foe - the rest of you take the hinder door, swing
around - heed the word of Wodan!"
 
His bodyguards were the first to understand. They yelled their glee and fell
on their enemies. These lurched back, aghast, into the reborn turmoil.
Solbern stayed behind, sprawled under the high seat in a pool of blood.
 
King's men streamed through the small postern. They hastened past the
building to the front. Most of the Teurings had gotten inside. Greutungs
overran those in the yard. Had they no better weapons, they ripped
cobblestones out of the earth and cast them. A risen moon gave light enough.
 
Howling, the warriors next cleared the entry-room. They outfitted themselves
and fell on the invaders both fore and aft.
 
Grim was that battle. Knowing they would die whatever happened, the Teurings
fought till they dropped. Hathawulf alone heaped a wall of slain before him.
When he fell, few were left to be glad of it.
 
The king himself would not have been among them, had not folk of his been
quick to stanch his wounds. As was, they bore him, barely aware, out of a
hall where none but the dead then dwelt.
 
 
 
1935
 
Laurie, Laurie!
 
 
 
372
 
 
 
Morning brought rain. Driven on a hooting wind, hail-cold, hail-hard, it hid
everything but the thorp that huddled beneath it, as if the rest of the world
had gone down in wreck. The roar on the roof resounded through hollow Heorot.
 
Darkness within seemed deepened by emptiness. Fires burned, lamps shone
well-nigh for naught amidst the shadows. The air was raw.
 
Three stood near the middle. That of which they spoke would not let them sit.
Breath puffed ghost-white out of their lips.
 
"Slain?" mumbled Alawin numbly. "Every last one of them?"
 
The Wanderer nodded. "Yes," he told them again, "though there will be as much
sorrow among Greutungs as Teurings. Ermanaric lives, but maimed and lamed,
and poorer by two sons."
 
Ulrica gave him a whetted look. "If this happened last night," she said, "you
have ridden no earthly horse to bring us the tale."
 
"You know who I am," he answered.
 
"Do I?" She lifted fingers toward him that were crooked like talons. Her
voice grew shrill. "If you are indeed Wodan, he is a wretched god, who could
not or would not help my sons in their need."
 
"Hold, hold," Alawin begged her, while he cast an abashed glance at the
Wanderer.
 
The latter said softly: "I mourn with you. But the will of Weard stands not
to be altered. As the story of what happened drifts west, belike you will
hear that I was there, and even that it was Ermanaric whom I saved. Know that
against time the gods themselves are powerless. I did what I was doomed to
do. Remember that in meeting the end that was set for them, Hathawulf and
Solbern redeemed the honor of their house, and won a name for themselves that
shall abide as long as their race does."
 
"But Ermanaric remains above ground," Ulrica snapped. "Alawin, the duty of
vengeance has passed to you."
 
"No!" said the Wanderer. "His task is more than that. It is to save the blood
of the family, the life of the clan. This is why I have come."
 
He turned to the youth, who stared wide-eyed. "Alawin," he went on,
"foreknowledge is mine, and a heavy load that is. Yet I may sometimes use it
to fend off harm. Listen well, for this is the last time you will ever hear
me."
 
"Wanderer, no!" Alawin cried. Breath hissed between Ulrica's teeth.
 
The Gray One lifted the hand that did not hold his spear. "Winter will soon
be upon you," he said, "but spring and summer follow. The tree of your
kindred stands bereft of leaves, but its roots slumber in strength, and it
shall be green anew - if an ax does not hew it down.
 
"Hasten. Hurt though he is, Ermanaric will seek to make an end, once for all,
of your troublesome breed. You cannot raise as much force as he can. If you
stay here, you will die.
 
"Think. You have readiness to fare west, and a welcome awaiting you among the
Visigoths. It will be the warmer for the rout Athanaric suffered this year
from the Huns at the River Dnestr; they all need fresh and hopeful souls.
Within a few days, you can be leading the trek. Ermanaric's men, when they
come, will find nothing but the ashes of this hall, which you set afire to
keep from him and be a balefire in honor of your brothers.
 
"You will not be fleeing. No, you will be off to forge a mighty morrow.
Alawin, you now keep the blood of your fathers. Ward it well."
 
Wrath twisted Ulrica's face. "Yes, you've always dealt in smooth words,"
shuddered out of her. "Heed not his slyness, Alawin. Hold fast. Avenge my
sons - the sons of Tharasmund."
 
The youth swallowed hard. "Would you really . . . have me go ... while the
murderer of Swanhild, Randwar, Hathawulf, Solbern - while he lives?" he
stammered.
 
"You must not stay," said the Wanderer gravely. "If you do, you will give up
the last life that was in your father -give it up to the king, along with
Hathawulf's son and wife, and your own mother. There is no dishonor -in
withdrawal when outnumbered."
 
"Y-yes. ... I could hire a Visigothic host - "
 
"You will have no call to. Hearken. Within three years, you will hear word
about Ermanaric that will gladden you. The justice of the gods shall fall
upon him. On this I give you my oath."
 
"What is that worth?" fleered Ulrica.
 
Alawin filled his lungs, straightened his shoulders, stood for a while and
then said quietly, "Stepmother, be still. I am the man of the house. We will
follow the Wanderer's rede."
 
The boy in him burst through for a moment: "Oh, but lord, forebear - will we
indeed never see you again? Do not forsake us!"
 
"I must," answered the Gray One. "It is needful for you." Suddenly: "Yes,
best I go at once. Farewell. Fare ever well."
 
He strode through the shadows, out the door, into the rain and the wind.
 
 
 
43
 
 
 
Here and there amidst the ages, the Time Patrol keeps places where its
members may rest. Among them is Hawaii before the Polynesians arrived.
Although that resort exists through thousands of years, Laurie and I counted
ourselves lucky to get a cottage for a month. In fact, we suspected Manse
Everard had pulled a string or two on our behalf.
 
He made no mention of that when he visited us late in our stay. He was simply
affable, went picnicking and surfing in our company, afterward tucked into
Laurie's dinner with the gusto it deserved. Not till later did he speak of
what lay behind us and before us on our world lines.
 
We sat on a deck which abutted the building.
 
Dusk gathered cool and blue in the garden, across the flowering forest
beyond. Eastward, land dropped steeply to where the sea glimmered
quicksilver; westward, the evening star trembled above Mauna Kea. A brook
chimed. Here was the peace that heals.
 
"So you feel ready to return?" Everard inquired.
 
"Yes," I said. "And it'll be a lot easier, too. The groundwork has been laid,
the basic information collected and assimilated. I just have to record the
songs and stories as they are composed and evolve."
 
"Just!" exclaimed Laurie. Her mockery was tender, and became solace as she
laid a hand over mine. "Well, at least you are free of your grief."
 
Everard's voice dropped low: "Are you sure of that, Carl?"
 
I could be calm as I replied, "Yes. Oh, there will always be memories that
hurt, but isn't that the common fate of man? There are more that are good,
and I'm able to draw on them once again."
 
"You realize, of course, you mustn't get obsessed the way you were. That's a
hazard which claims many of us -" Did his tone stumble, ever so slightly? It
grew brisk. "When it does, the victim has to overcome it and recover."
 
"I know," I said, and chuckled a bit. "Don't you know I know?"
 
Everard puffed on his pipe. "Not exactly. Since the rest of your career seems
free of any more disarray than is normal for a field agent, I couldn't
justify spending lifespan and Patrol resources on further investigation. This
isn't official business. I'm here as a friend, who'd simply like to find out
how you're doing. Don't tell me anything you don't care to."
 
"You're a sweet old bear, you are," Laurie said to him.
 
I could not stay entirely comfortable, but a sip of my rum collins soothed.
"Well, sure, you're welcome to the information," I began. "I did assure
myself that Alawin would be all right." Everard stirred. "How?" he demanded.
"Not to worry, Manse. I proceeded cautiously, for the most part indirectly.
Different identities on different occasions. The few times he glimpsed me, he
recognized nothing." My fingers passed over a smooth-shaven chin - Roman
style, like my close-cropped hair; and when the need arises, a Patrolman has
advanced disguise technology at his service. "Oh, yes, I've laid the Wanderer
to rest."
 
"Good!" Everard relaxed back into his chair. "What did become of that lad?"
 
"Alawin, you mean? Well, he led a fair-sized group, including his mother
Erelieva and her household, he led them west to join Frithigern." (He would
lead them, three centuries hence. But we were talking our native English. The
Temporal language has appropriate tenses.) "He enjoyed favor there,
especially after he was baptized. That by itself was reason for letting the
Wanderer fade away, you understand. How could a Christian stay close to a
heathen god?"
 
"Hm. I wonder what he thought about those experiences, later."
 
"I get the impression he kept his mouth shut. Naturally, if his descendants -
he married well - if his descendants preserved any tradition about it, they'd
suppose that some kind of spook had been running around in the old country."
 
"The old country? Oh, yes. Alawin never got back to the Ukraine, did he?"
 
"No, hardly. Would you like me to sketch the history for you?"
 
"Please. I did study it somewhat, in connection with your case, but not much
of the aftermath. Besides, that was quite a spell ago, on my world line."
 
And plenty must have happened to you since, I thought. Aloud: "Well, in 374
Frithigern's people crossed the Danube, by permission, and settled in Thrace.
Athanaric's soon followed, although into Transylvania. Hunnish pressure had
gotten too severe.
 
"The Roman officials abused and exploited the Goths - in other words, were a
government - for several years. Finally the Goths decided they'd had a
bellyful, and revolted. The Huns had given them the idea and technique of
developing cavalry, which they made heavy; at the battle of Adrianople in 378
it rode the Romans down. Alawin distinguished himself there, by the way,
which started him toward the prominence he achieved. A new Emperor,
Theodosius, made peace with the Goths in 381, and most of their warriors
entered the Roman service as foederati: allies, we'd say.
 
"Afterward came renewed conflicts, battles, migrations - the Volkerwanderung
was under way. I'll sum it up for my Alawin by saying that after a turbulent
but basically happy life, he died, at a ripe old age, in the kingdom which by
then the Visigoths had carved out for themselves in southern Gaul.
Descendants of his took a leading part in founding the Spanish nation. "So
you see how I can let that family go from me, and get on with my work."
 
Laurie's hand closed hard around mine.
 
Twilight was becoming night. Stars blinked forth. A coal in Everard's pipe
made its own red twinkle. He himself was a darkling bulk, like the mountain
that lifted above the western horizon.
 
"Yes," he mused, "it comes back to me, sort of. But you've been speaking
about the Visigoths. The Ostrogoths, Alawin's original countrymen - didn't
they take over in Italy?"
 
"Eventually," I said. "First they had dreadful things to undergo." I paused.
What I was about to utter would touch wounds that were not fully scarred
over. "The Wanderer spoke truth. There was vengeance for Swanhild."
 
 
 
374
 
 
 
Ermanaric sat alone beneath the stars. Wind whimpered. From afar he heard
wolves howl.
 
After the messengers had brought their news, he could soon endure no more of
the terror and the gabble that followed. At his command, two warriors had
helped him up the stairs to the flat roof of this blockhouse. They set him
down on a bench by the parapet and wrapped a fur cloak about his hunched
shoulders. "Go!" he barked, and they went, fear upon them.
 
He had watched sunset smolder away in the west, while thunderheads gathered
blue-black in the east. Those clouds now loomed across a fourth of heaven.
Lightnings played through their caverns.
 
Before dawn, the storm would be here. As yet, though, only its forerunner
wind had arrived, winter-cold in the middle of summer. Elsewhere the stars
still shone in their hordes.
 
They were small and strange and without pity. Ermanaric's gaze tried to flee
the sight of Wodan's Wain, where it wheeled around the Eye of Tiwaz that
forever watches from the north. But always the sign of the Wanderer drew him
back. "I did not heed you, gods," he mumbled once. "I trusted in my own
strength. You are more tricky and cruel than I knew."
 
Here he sat, he the mighty, lame of hand and foot, able to do naught but hear
how the foe had crossed the river and smashed underhoof the army that sought
to stay them. He should be thinking what next to try, giving his orders,
rallying his folk. They were not undone, if they got the right leadership.
But the king's head felt hollow.
 
Hollow, not empty. Dead men filled that hall of bone, the men who fell with
Hathawulf and Solbern, the flower of the East Goths. Had they been alive
during these past days, together they would have hurled back the Huns,
Ermanaric at their forefront. But Ermanaric had died too, in the same
slaughter. Nothing was left but a cripple, whose endless pains gnawed holes
in his mind.
 
Naught could he do for his kingdom but let go of it, in hopes that his oldest
living son might be worthier, might be victorious. Ermanaric bared teeth at
the stars. Too well did he know how that hope lied. Before the Ostrogoths lay
defeat, rapine, butchery, subjection. If ever they became free again, it
would be long after he had moldered back into the earth.
 
He - how blessed that would be - or merely his flesh? What waited for him
beyond the dark?
 
He drew his knife. Starlight and lightninglight shimmered on the steel. For a
while it trembled in his hand. The wind whittered.
 
"Have done!" he screamed. He ruffled his beard aside and brought the point
under the right corner of his jaw. Eyes lifted anew, as if of themselves, to
the Wain. Something white flickered yonder - a scrap of cloud, or Swanhild
riding behind the Wanderer? Ermanaric called forth all the courage that
remained to him. He thrust the knife inward and hauled it across.
 
Blood spurted from the slashed throat. He sagged and fell to the deck. The
last thing he heard was thunder. It sounded like the hoofs of horses bearing
westward the Hunnish midnight.
 
